Ancient Egypt was a cradle of civilization concentrated along the lower reaches of the Nile River in Northeast Africa. It emerged from prehistoric Egypt around 3150 BC (according to conventional Egyptian chronology),[1] when Upper and Lower Egypt were amalgamated by Menes, who is believed by the majority of Egyptologists to have been the same person as Narmer.[2] The history of ancient Egypt unfolded as a series of stable kingdoms interspersed by the "Intermediate Periods" of relative instability. These stable kingdoms existed in one of three periods: the Old Kingdom of the Early Bronze Age; the Middle Kingdom of the Middle Bronze Age; or the New Kingdom of the Late Bronze Age.

The pinnacle of ancient Egyptian power was achieved during the New Kingdom, which extended its rule to much of Nubia and a considerable portion of the Levant. After this period, Egypt entered an era of slow decline. Over the course of its history, it was invaded or conquered by a number of foreign civilizations, including the Hyksos, the Kushites, the Assyrians, the Persians, and, most notably, the Greeks and then the Romans. The end of ancient Egypt is variously defined as occurring with the end of the Late Period during the Wars of Alexander the Great in 332 BC or with the end of the Greek-ruled Ptolemaic Kingdom during the Roman conquest of Egypt in 30 BC.[3] In AD 642, the Arab conquest of Egypt brought an end to the region's millennium-long Greco-Roman period.

The success of ancient Egyptian civilization came partly from its ability to adapt to the Nile's conditions for agriculture. The predictable flooding of the Nile and controlled irrigation of its fertile valley produced surplus crops, which supported a more dense population, and thereby substantial social and cultural development. With resources to spare, the administration sponsored the mineral exploitation of the valley and its surrounding desert regions, the early development of an independent writing system, the organization of collective construction and agricultural projects, trade with other civilizations, and a military to assert Egyptian dominance throughout the Near East. Motivating and organizing these activities was a bureaucracy of elite scribes, religious leaders, and administrators under the control of the reigning pharaoh, who ensured the cooperation and unity of the Egyptian people in the context of an elaborate system of religious beliefs.[4]

Among the many achievements of ancient Egypt are: the quarrying, surveying, and construction techniques that supported the building of monumental pyramids, temples, and obelisks; a system of mathematics; a practical and effective system of medicine; irrigation systems and agricultural production techniques; the first known planked boats;[5] Egyptian faience and glass technology; new forms of literature; and the earliest known peace treaty, which was ratified with the Anatolia-based Hittite Empire.[6] Its art and architecture were widely copied and its antiquities were carried off to be studied, admired, or coveted in the far corners of the world. Likewise, its monumental ruins inspired the imaginations of travelers and writers for millennia. A newfound European and Egyptian respect for antiquities and excavations that began in earnest in the early modern period has led to much scientific investigation of ancient Egypt and its society, as well as a greater appreciation of its cultural legacy.[7]

History
Main articles: History of ancient Egypt and Population history of Egypt
The Nile has been the lifeline of its region for much of human history. The fertile floodplain of the Nile gave humans the opportunity to develop a settled agricultural economy and a more sophisticated, centralized society that became a cornerstone in the history of human civilization.[8]


Predynastic period
Main article: Predynastic Egypt

A typical, Naqada II (Predynastic Period), jar decorated with gazelles
In Predynastic and Early Dynastic times, the Egyptian climate was much less arid than it is today. Large regions of Egypt were savanna and traversed by herds of grazing ungulates. Foliage and fauna were far more prolific in all environs, and the Nile region supported large populations of waterfowl. Hunting would have been common for Egyptians, and this is also the period when many animals were first domesticated.[9]

By about 5500 BC, small tribes living in the Nile valley had developed into a series of cultures demonstrating firm control of agriculture and animal husbandry, and identifiable by their pottery and personal items, such as combs, bracelets, and beads. The largest of these early cultures in upper (Southern) Egypt was the Badarian culture, which probably originated in the Western Desert; it was known for its high-quality ceramics, stone tools, and its use of copper.[10]

The Badari was followed by the Naqada culture: the Naqada I (Amratian), the Naqada II (Gerzeh), and Naqada III (Semainean).[11] These brought a number of technological improvements. As early as the Naqada I Period, predynastic Egyptians imported obsidian from Ethiopia, used to shape blades and other objects from flakes.[12][13] Mutual trade with the Levant was established during Naqada II (c. 3600–3350 BC); this period was also the beginning of trade with Mesopotamia, which continued into the early dynastic period and beyond.[14] Over a period of about 1,000 years, the Naqada culture developed from a few small farming communities into a powerful civilization whose leaders were in complete control of the people and resources of the Nile valley.[15] Establishing a power center at Nekhen, and later at Abydos, Naqada III leaders expanded their control of Egypt northwards along the Nile.[16] They also traded with Nubia to the south, the oases of the western desert to the west, and the cultures of the eastern Mediterranean and Near East to the east.[17]

The Naqada culture manufactured a diverse selection of material goods, reflective of the increasing power and wealth of the elite, as well as societal personal-use items, which included combs, small statuary, painted pottery, high quality decorative stone vases, cosmetic palettes, and jewelry made of gold, lapis, and ivory. They also developed a ceramic glaze known as faience, which was used well into the Roman Period to decorate cups, amulets, and figurines.[18][19] During the last predynastic phase, the Naqada culture began using written symbols that eventually were developed into a full system of hieroglyphs for writing the ancient Egyptian language.[20]


Early tomb painting from Nekhen, c. 3500 BC, Naqada, possibly Gerzeh culture
Early Dynastic Period (c. 3150–2686 BC)
Main article: Early Dynastic Period (Egypt)
The Early Dynastic Period was approximately contemporary to the early Sumerian-Akkadian civilization of Mesopotamia and of ancient Elam. The third-century BC Egyptian priest Manetho grouped the long line of kings from Menes to his own time into 30 dynasties, a system still used today. He began his official history with the king named "Meni" (or Menes in Greek), who was believed to have united the two kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt.[21]


The Narmer Palette depicts the unification of the Two Lands.[22]
The transition to a unified state happened more gradually than ancient Egyptian writers represented, and there is no contemporary record of Menes. Some scholars now believe, however, that the mythical Menes may have been the king Narmer, who is depicted wearing royal regalia on the ceremonial Narmer Palette, in a symbolic act of unification.[23] In the Early Dynastic Period, which began about 3000 BC, the first of the Dynastic kings solidified control over Lower Egypt by establishing a capital at Memphis, from which he could control the labor force and agriculture of the fertile delta region, as well as the lucrative and critical trade routes to the Levant. The increasing power and wealth of the kings during the early dynastic period was reflected in their elaborate mastaba tombs and mortuary cult structures at Abydos, which were used to celebrate the deified king after his death.[24] The strong institution of kingship developed by the kings served to legitimize state control over the land, labor, and resources that were essential to the survival and growth of ancient Egyptian civilization.[25]

Old Kingdom (2686–2181 BC)
Main article: Old Kingdom of Egypt

The pyramids of Giza are among the most recognizable symbols of ancient Egyptian civilization.
Major advances in architecture, art, and technology were made during the Old Kingdom, fueled by the increased agricultural productivity and resulting population growth, made possible by a well-developed central administration.[26] Some of ancient Egypt's crowning achievements, the Giza pyramids and Great Sphinx, were constructed during the Old Kingdom. Under the direction of the vizier, state officials collected taxes, coordinated irrigation projects to improve crop yield, and drafted peasants to work on construction projects.[27]


Khafre enthroned
With the rising importance of central administration in Egypt, a new class of educated scribes and officials arose who were granted estates by the king in payment for their services. Kings also made land grants to their mortuary cults and local temples, to ensure that these institutions had the resources to worship the king after his death. Scholars believe that five centuries of these practices slowly eroded the economic vitality of Egypt, and that the economy could no longer afford to support a large centralized administration.[28] As the power of the kings diminished, regional governors called nomarchs began to challenge the supremacy of the office of king. This, coupled with severe droughts between 2200 and 2150 BC,[29] is believed to have caused the country to enter the 140-year period of famine and strife known as the First Intermediate Period.[30]

First Intermediate Period (2181–2055 BC)
Main article: First Intermediate Period of Egypt
After Egypt's central government collapsed at the end of the Old Kingdom, the administration could no longer support or stabilize the country's economy. The ensuing food shortages and political disputes escalated into famines and small-scale civil wars. Yet despite difficult problems, local leaders, owing no tribute to the king, used their new-found independence to establish a thriving culture in the provinces. Once in control of their own resources, the provinces became economically richer—which was demonstrated by larger and better burials among all social classes.[31]

Free from their loyalties to the king, local rulers began competing with each other for territorial control and political power. By 2160 BC, rulers in Herakleopolis controlled Lower Egypt in the north, while a rival clan based in Thebes, the Intef family, took control of Upper Egypt in the south. As the Intefs grew in power and expanded their control northward, a clash between the two rival dynasties became inevitable. Around 2055 BC the northern Theban forces under Nebhepetre Mentuhotep II finally defeated the Herakleopolitan rulers, reuniting the Two Lands. They inaugurated a period of economic and cultural renaissance known as the Middle Kingdom.[32]

Middle Kingdom (2134–1690 BC)
Main article: Middle Kingdom of Egypt

A figure wearing the red crown of Lower Egypt, most probably Amenemhat II or Senwosret II. It functioned as a divine guardian for the imiut; the divine kilt suggests that the statuette was not merely a representation of the living ruler.[33]

Pyramidion of Amenemhat III, capstone of the Black Pyramid

Coffin of Khnumnakht in 12th dynasty style, with palace facade, columns of inscriptions, and two Wedjat eyes[34]
The kings of the Middle Kingdom restored the country's stability, which saw a resurgence of art and monumental building projects, and a new flourishing of literature.[35] Mentuhotep II and his Eleventh Dynasty successors ruled from Thebes, but the vizier Amenemhat I, upon assuming the kingship at the beginning of the Twelfth Dynasty around 1985 BC, shifted the kingdom's capital to the city of Itjtawy, located in Faiyum.[36] From Itjtawy, the kings of the Twelfth Dynasty undertook a far-sighted land reclamation and irrigation scheme to increase agricultural output in the region. Moreover, the military reconquered territory in Nubia that was rich in quarries and gold mines, while laborers built a defensive structure in the Eastern Delta, called the "Walls of the Ruler", to defend against foreign attack.[37]

With the kings having secured the country militarily and politically and with vast agricultural and mineral wealth at their disposal, the nation's population, arts, and religion flourished. The Middle Kingdom displayed an increase in expressions of personal piety toward the gods. Middle Kingdom literature featured sophisticated themes and characters written in a confident, eloquent style.[38] The relief and portrait sculpture of the period captured subtle, individual details that reached new heights of technical sophistication.[39]

Second Intermediate Period (1674–1549 BC) and the Hyksos
Main article: Second Intermediate Period of Egypt
Around 1785 BC, as the power of the Middle Kingdom kings weakened, a Western Asian people called the Hyksos, who had already settled in the Delta, seized control of Egypt and established their capital at Avaris, forcing the former central government to retreat to Thebes. The king was treated as a vassal and expected to pay tribute.[40] The Hyksos ('foreign rulers') retained Egyptian models of government and identified as kings, thereby integrating Egyptian elements into their culture.[41]

After retreating south, the native Theban kings found themselves trapped between the Canaanite Hyksos ruling the north and the Hyksos' Nubian allies, the Kushites, to the south. After years of vassalage, Thebes gathered enough strength to challenge the Hyksos in a conflict that lasted more than 30 years, until 1555 BC.[40] Ahmose I waged a series of campaigns that permanently eradicated the Hyksos' presence in Egypt. He is considered the founder of the Eighteenth Dynasty, and the military became a central priority for his successors, who sought to expand Egypt's borders and attempted to gain mastery of the Near East.[42]

New Kingdom (1549–1069 BC)
Main article: New Kingdom of Egypt

Pharaohs' tombs were provided with vast quantities of wealth, such as the golden mask from the mummy of Tutankhamun.
The New Kingdom pharaohs established a period of unprecedented prosperity by securing their borders and strengthening diplomatic ties with their neighbours, including the Mitanni Empire, Assyria, and Canaan. Military campaigns waged under Tuthmosis I and his grandson Tuthmosis III extended the influence of the pharaohs to the largest empire Egypt had ever seen.

Between their reigns, Hatshepsut, a queen who established herself as pharaoh, launched many building projects, including the restoration of temples damaged by the Hyksos, and sent trading expeditions to Punt and the Sinai.[43] When Tuthmosis III died in 1425 BC, Egypt had an empire extending from Niya in north west Syria to the Fourth Cataract of the Nile in Nubia, cementing loyalties and opening access to critical imports such as bronze and wood.[44]

The New Kingdom pharaohs began a large-scale building campaign to promote the god Amun, whose growing cult was based in Karnak. They also constructed monuments to glorify their own achievements, both real and imagined. The Karnak temple is the largest Egyptian temple ever built.[45]

Around 1350 BC, the stability of the New Kingdom was threatened when Amenhotep IV ascended the throne and instituted a series of radical and chaotic reforms. Changing his name to Akhenaten, he touted the previously obscure sun deity Aten as the supreme deity, suppressed the worship of most other deities, and moved the capital to the new city of Akhetaten (modern-day Amarna).[46] He was devoted to his new religion and artistic style. After his death, the cult of the Aten was quickly abandoned and the traditional religious order restored. The subsequent pharaohs, Tutankhamun, Ay, and Horemheb, worked to erase all mention of Akhenaten's heresy, now known as the Amarna Period.[47]


Two (north side) of the four colossal statues of Ramesses II flank the entrance of his temple Abu Simbel.
Around 1279 BC, Ramesses II, also known as Ramesses the Great, ascended the throne, and went on to build more temples, erect more statues and obelisks, and sire more children than any other pharaoh in history.[c] A bold military leader, Ramesses II led his army against the Hittites in the Battle of Kadesh (in modern Syria) and, after fighting to a stalemate, finally agreed to the first recorded peace treaty, around 1258 BC.[48]

Egypt's wealth, however, made it a tempting target for invasion, particularly by the Libyan Berbers to the west, and the Sea Peoples, a conjectured confederation of seafarers from the Aegean Sea.[d] Initially, the military was able to repel these invasions, but Egypt eventually lost control of its remaining territories in southern Canaan, much of it falling to the Assyrians. The effects of external threats were exacerbated by internal problems such as corruption, tomb robbery, and civil unrest. After regaining their power, the high priests at the temple of Amun in Thebes accumulated vast tracts of land and wealth, and their expanded power splintered the country during the Third Intermediate Period.[49]

Third Intermediate Period (1069–653 BC)
Main article: Third Intermediate Period of Egypt
Following the death of Ramesses XI in 1078 BC, Smendes assumed authority over the northern part of Egypt, ruling from the city of Tanis. The south was effectively controlled by the High Priests of Amun at Thebes, who recognized Smendes in name only.[50] During this time, Libyans had been settling in the western delta, and chieftains of these settlers began increasing their autonomy. Libyan princes took control of the delta under Shoshenq I in 945 BC, founding the so-called Libyan or Bubastite dynasty that would rule for some 200 years. Shoshenq also gained control of southern Egypt by placing his family members in important priestly positions. Libyan control began to erode as a rival dynasty in the delta arose in Leontopolis, and Kushites threatened from the south.


Statues of two pharaohs of Egypt's Twenty-Fifth Dynasty and several other Kushite kings, Kerma Museum[51]
Around 727 BC the Kushite king Piye invaded northward, seizing control of Thebes and eventually the Delta, which established the 25th Dynasty.[52] During the 25th Dynasty, Pharaoh Taharqa created an empire nearly as large as the New Kingdom's. Twenty-fifth Dynasty pharaohs built, or restored, temples and monuments throughout the Nile valley, including at Memphis, Karnak, Kawa, and Jebel Barkal.[53] During this period, the Nile valley saw the first widespread construction of pyramids (many in modern Sudan) since the Middle Kingdom.[54][55][56]

Egypt's far-reaching prestige declined considerably toward the end of the Third Intermediate Period. Its foreign allies had fallen into the Assyrian sphere of influence, and by 700 BC war between the two states became inevitable. Between 671 and 667 BC the Assyrians began the Assyrian conquest of Egypt. The reigns of both Taharqa and his successor, Tanutamun, were filled with frequent conflict with the Assyrians. Ultimately, the Assyrians pushed the Kushites back into Nubia, occupied Memphis, and sacked the temples of Thebes.[57]

Late Period (653–332 BC)
Main articles: Late Period of ancient Egypt and History of Persian Egypt
The Assyrians left control of Egypt to a series of vassals who became known as the Saite kings of the Twenty-Sixth Dynasty. By 653 BC, the Saite king Psamtik I was able to oust the Assyrians with the help of Greek mercenaries, who were recruited to form Egypt's first navy. Greek influence expanded greatly as the city-state of Naucratis became the home of Greeks in the Nile Delta. The Saite kings based in the new capital of Sais witnessed a brief but spirited resurgence in the economy and culture, but in 525 BC, the Persian Empire, led by Cambyses II, began its conquest of Egypt, eventually defeating the pharaoh Psamtik III at the Battle of Pelusium. Cambyses II then assumed the formal title of pharaoh, but ruled Egypt from Iran, leaving Egypt under the control of a satrap. A few revolts against the Persians marked the 5th century BC, but Egypt was never able to overthrow the Persians until the end of the century.[58]

Following its annexation by Persia, Egypt was joined with Cyprus and Phoenicia in the sixth satrapy of the Achaemenid Persian Empire. This first period of Persian rule over Egypt, also known as the Twenty-Seventh Dynasty, ended in 402 BC, when Egypt regained independence under a series of native dynasties. The last of these dynasties, the Thirtieth, proved to be the last native royal house of ancient Egypt, ending with the kingship of Nectanebo II. A brief restoration of Persian rule, sometimes known as the Thirty-First Dynasty, began in 343 BC, but shortly after, in 332 BC, the Persian ruler Mazaces handed Egypt over to Alexander the Great without a fight.[59]

Ptolemaic period (332–30 BC)
Main article: Ptolemaic Kingdom

Portrait of Ptolemy VI Philometor wearing the double crown of Egypt
In 332 BC, Alexander the Great conquered Egypt with little resistance from the Persians and was welcomed by the Egyptians as a deliverer. The administration established by Alexander's successors, the Macedonian Ptolemaic Kingdom, was based on an Egyptian model and based in the new capital city of Alexandria. The city showcased the power and prestige of Hellenistic rule, and became a centre of learning and culture that included the famous Library of Alexandria and the Mouseion.[60] The Lighthouse of Alexandria lit the way for the many ships that kept trade flowing through the city—as the Ptolemies made commerce and revenue-generating enterprises, such as papyrus manufacturing, their top priority.[61]

Hellenistic culture did not supplant native Egyptian culture, as the Ptolemies supported time-honored traditions in an effort to secure the loyalty of the populace. They built new temples in Egyptian style, supported traditional cults, and portrayed themselves as pharaohs. Some traditions merged, as Greek and Egyptian gods were syncretized into composite deities, such as Serapis, and classical Greek forms of sculpture influenced traditional Egyptian motifs. Despite their efforts to appease the Egyptians, the Ptolemies were challenged by native rebellion, bitter family rivalries, and frequent mob violence in Alexandria.[62] In addition, as Rome relied more heavily on imports of grain from Egypt, the Romans took great interest in the political situation in the country. Continued Egyptian revolts, ambitious politicians, and powerful opponents from the Near East made this situation unstable, leading Rome to send forces to secure the country as a province of its empire.[63]

Roman period (30 BC – AD 642)
Main article: Roman Egypt

The Fayum mummy portraits epitomize the meeting of Egyptian and Roman cultures.
Egypt became a province of the Roman Empire in 30 BC, following the defeat of Mark Antony and Ptolemaic Queen Cleopatra VII by Octavian (later Emperor Augustus) in the Battle of Actium. The Romans relied heavily on grain shipments from Egypt, and the Roman army, under the control of a prefect appointed by the emperor, quelled rebellions, strictly enforced the collection of heavy taxes, and prevented attacks by bandits, which had become a notorious problem during the period.[64] Alexandria became an increasingly important center on the trade route with the orient, as exotic luxuries were in high demand in Rome.[65]

Although the Romans had a more hostile attitude than the Greeks towards the Egyptians, some traditions such as mummification and worship of the traditional gods continued.[66] The art of mummy portraiture flourished, and some Roman emperors had themselves depicted as pharaohs, though not to the extent that the Ptolemies had. The former lived outside Egypt and did not perform the ceremonial functions of Egyptian kingship. Local administration became Roman in style and closed to native Egyptians.[66]

From the mid-first century AD, Christianity took root in Egypt and it was originally seen as another cult that could be accepted. However, it was an uncompromising religion that sought to win converts from the pagan Egyptian and Greco-Roman religions and threatened popular religious traditions. This led to the persecution of converts to Christianity, culminating in the great purges of Diocletian starting in 303, but eventually Christianity won out.[67] In 391, the Christian emperor Theodosius introduced legislation that banned pagan rites and closed temples.[68] Alexandria became the scene of great anti-pagan riots with public and private religious imagery destroyed.[69] As a consequence, Egypt's native religious culture was continually in decline. While the native population continued to speak their language, the ability to read hieroglyphic writing slowly disappeared as the role of the Egyptian temple priests and priestesses diminished. The temples themselves were sometimes converted to churches or abandoned to the desert.[70]

Government and economy
Administration and commerce

The pharaoh was usually depicted wearing symbols (scepter, ankh, head-dress, beard etc) of royalty and power.
The pharaoh was the absolute monarch of the country and, at least in theory, wielded complete control of the land and its resources. The king was the supreme military commander and head of the government, who relied on a bureaucracy of officials to manage his affairs. In charge of the administration was his second in command, the vizier, who acted as the king's representative and coordinated land surveys, the treasury, building projects, the legal system, and the archives.[71] At a regional level, the country was divided into as many as 42 administrative regions called nomes each governed by a nomarch, who was accountable to the vizier for his jurisdiction. The temples formed the backbone of the economy. Not only were they places of worship, but were also responsible for collecting and storing the kingdom's wealth in a system of granaries and treasuries administered by overseers, who redistributed grain and goods.[72]

Much of the economy was centrally organized and strictly controlled. Although the ancient Egyptians did not use coinage until the Late period,[73] they did use a type of money-barter system,[74] with standard sacks of grain and the deben, a weight of roughly 91 grams (3 oz) of copper or silver, forming a common denominator.[75] Workers were paid in grain; a simple laborer might earn 5+1⁄2 sacks (200 kg or 400 lb) of grain per month, while a foreman might earn 7+1⁄2 sacks (250 kg or 550 lb). Prices were fixed across the country and recorded in lists to facilitate trading; for example a shirt cost five copper deben, while a cow cost 140 deben.[75] Grain could be traded for other goods, according to the fixed price list.[75] During the fifth century BC coined money was introduced into Egypt from abroad. At first the coins were used as standardized pieces of precious metal rather than true money, but in the following centuries international traders came to rely on coinage.[76]

Social status

Painted limestone relief of a noble member of Ancient Egyptian society during the New Kingdom
Egyptian society was highly stratified, and social status was expressly displayed. Farmers made up the bulk of the population, but agricultural produce was owned directly by the state, temple, or noble family that owned the land.[77] Farmers were also subject to a labor tax and were required to work on irrigation or construction projects in a corvée system.[78] Artists and craftsmen were of higher status than farmers, but they were also under state control, working in the shops attached to the temples and paid directly from the state treasury. Scribes and officials formed the upper class in ancient Egypt, known as the "white kilt class" in reference to the bleached linen garments that served as a mark of their rank.[79] The upper class prominently displayed their social status in art and literature. Below the nobility were the priests, physicians, and engineers with specialized training in their field. It is unclear whether slavery as understood today existed in ancient Egypt; there is difference of opinions among authors.[80]

The ancient Egyptians viewed men and women, including people from all social classes, as essentially equal under the law, and even the lowliest peasant was entitled to petition the vizier and his court for redress.[81] Although slaves were mostly used as indentured servants, they were able to buy and sell their servitude, work their way to freedom or nobility, and were usually treated by doctors in the workplace.[82] Both men and women had the right to own and sell property, make contracts, marry and divorce, receive inheritance, and pursue legal disputes in court. Married couples could own property jointly and protect themselves from divorce by agreeing to marriage contracts, which stipulated the financial obligations of the husband to his wife and children should the marriage end. Compared with their counterparts in ancient Greece, Rome, and even more modern places around the world, ancient Egyptian women had a greater range of personal choices, legal rights, and opportunities for achievement. Women such as Hatshepsut and Cleopatra VII even became pharaohs, while others wielded power as Divine Wives of Amun. Despite these freedoms, ancient Egyptian women did not often take part in official roles in the administration, aside from the royal high priestesses, apparently served only secondary roles in the temples (not much data for many dynasties), and were not so probably to be as educated as men.[81]

Legal system

The Seated Scribe from Saqqara, 5th dynasty
The head of the legal system was officially the pharaoh, who was responsible for enacting laws, delivering justice, and maintaining law and order, a concept the ancient Egyptians referred to as Ma'at.[71] Although no legal codes from ancient Egypt survive, court documents show that Egyptian law was based on a common-sense view of right and wrong that emphasized reaching agreements and resolving conflicts rather than strictly adhering to a complicated set of statutes.[81] Local councils of elders, known as Kenbet in the New Kingdom, were responsible for ruling in court cases involving small claims and minor disputes.[71] More serious cases involving murder, major land transactions, and tomb robbery were referred to the Great Kenbet, over which the vizier or pharaoh presided. Plaintiffs and defendants were expected to represent themselves and were required to swear an oath that they had told the truth. In some cases, the state took on both the role of prosecutor and judge, and it could torture the accused with beatings to obtain a confession and the names of any co-conspirators. Whether the charges were trivial or serious, court scribes documented the complaint, testimony, and verdict of the case for future reference.[83]

Punishment for minor crimes involved either imposition of fines, beatings, facial mutilation, or exile, depending on the severity of the offense. Serious crimes such as murder and tomb robbery were punished by execution, carried out by decapitation, drowning, or impaling the criminal on a stake. Punishment could also be extended to the criminal's family.[71] Beginning in the New Kingdom, oracles played a major role in the legal system, dispensing justice in both civil and criminal cases. The procedure was to ask the god a "yes" or "no" question concerning the right or wrong of an issue. The god, carried by a number of priests, rendered judgement by choosing one or the other, moving forward or backward, or pointing to one of the answers written on a piece of papyrus or an ostracon.[84]

Agriculture
Main article: Ancient Egyptian agriculture
See also: Gardens of ancient Egypt

Measuring and recording the harvest, from the tomb of Menna at Thebes (Eighteenth Dynasty)

Rectangular fishpond with ducks and lotus planted round with date palms and fruit trees, Tomb of Nebamun, Thebes, 18th Dynasty
A combination of favorable geographical features contributed to the success of ancient Egyptian culture, the most important of which was the rich fertile soil resulting from annual inundations of the Nile River. The ancient Egyptians were thus able to produce an abundance of food, allowing the population to devote more time and resources to cultural, technological, and artistic pursuits. Land management was crucial in ancient Egypt because taxes were assessed based on the amount of land a person owned.[85]

Farming in Egypt was dependent on the cycle of the Nile River. The Egyptians recognized three seasons: Akhet (flooding), Peret (planting), and Shemu (harvesting). The flooding season lasted from June to September, depositing on the river's banks a layer of mineral-rich silt ideal for growing crops. After the floodwaters had receded, the growing season lasted from October to February. Farmers plowed and planted seeds in the fields, which were irrigated with ditches and canals. Egypt received little rainfall, so farmers relied on the Nile to water their crops.[86] From March to May, farmers used sickles to harvest their crops, which were then threshed with a flail to separate the straw from the grain. Winnowing removed the chaff from the grain, and the grain was then ground into flour, brewed to make beer, or stored for later use.[87]

The ancient Egyptians cultivated emmer and barley, and several other cereal grains, all of which were used to make the two main food staples of bread and beer.[88] Flax plants, uprooted before they started flowering, were grown for the fibers of their stems. These fibers were split along their length and spun into thread, which was used to weave sheets of linen and to make clothing. Papyrus growing on the banks of the Nile River was used to make paper. Vegetables and fruits were grown in garden plots, close to habitations and on higher ground, and had to be watered by hand. Vegetables included leeks, garlic, melons, squashes, pulses, lettuce, and other crops, in addition to grapes that were made into wine.[89]


A tomb relief depicts workers plowing the fields, harvesting the crops, and threshing the grain under the direction of an overseer, painting in the tomb of Nakht.
Animals

Sennedjem plows his fields in Aaru with a pair of oxen, Deir el-Medina.
The Egyptians believed that a balanced relationship between people and animals was an essential element of the cosmic order; thus humans, animals and plants were believed to be members of a single whole.[90] Animals, both domesticated and wild, were therefore a critical source of spirituality, companionship, and sustenance to the ancient Egyptians. Cattle were the most important livestock; the administration collected taxes on livestock in regular censuses, and the size of a herd reflected the prestige and importance of the estate or temple that owned them. In addition to cattle, the ancient Egyptians kept sheep, goats, and pigs. Poultry, such as ducks, geese, and pigeons, were captured in nets and bred on farms, where they were force-fed with dough to fatten them.[91] The Nile provided a plentiful source of fish. Bees were also domesticated from at least the Old Kingdom, and provided both honey and wax.[92]

The ancient Egyptians used donkeys and oxen as beasts of burden, and they were responsible for plowing the fields and trampling seed into the soil. The slaughter of a fattened ox was also a central part of an offering ritual. Horses were introduced by the Hyksos in the Second Intermediate Period. Camels, although known from the New Kingdom, were not used as beasts of burden until the Late Period. There is also evidence to suggest that elephants were briefly used in the Late Period but largely abandoned due to lack of grazing land.[91] Cats, dogs, and monkeys were common family pets, while more exotic pets imported from the heart of Africa, such as Sub-Saharan African lions,[93] were reserved for royalty. Herodotus observed that the Egyptians were the only people to keep their animals with them in their houses.[90] During the Late Period, the worship of the gods in their animal form was extremely popular, such as the cat goddess Bastet and the ibis god Thoth, and these animals were kept in large numbers for the purpose of ritual sacrifice.[94]

Natural resources
Further information: Mining industry of Egypt and Stone quarries of ancient Egypt
Egypt is rich in building and decorative stone, copper and lead ores, gold, and semiprecious stones. These natural resources allowed the ancient Egyptians to build monuments, sculpt statues, make tools, and fashion jewelry.[95] Embalmers used salts from the Wadi Natrun for mummification, which also provided the gypsum needed to make plaster.[96] Ore-bearing rock formations were found in distant, inhospitable wadis in the Eastern Desert and the Sinai, requiring large, state-controlled expeditions to obtain natural resources found there. There were extensive gold mines in Nubia, and one of the first maps known is of a gold mine in this region. The Wadi Hammamat was a notable source of granite, greywacke, and gold. Flint was the first mineral collected and used to make tools, and flint handaxes are the earliest pieces of evidence of habitation in the Nile valley. Nodules of the mineral were carefully flaked to make blades and arrowheads of moderate hardness and durability even after copper was adopted for this purpose.[97] Ancient Egyptians were among the first to use minerals such as sulfur as cosmetic substances.[98]

The Egyptians worked deposits of the lead ore galena at Gebel Rosas to make net sinkers, plumb bobs, and small figurines. Copper was the most important metal for toolmaking in ancient Egypt and was smelted in furnaces from malachite ore mined in the Sinai.[99] Workers collected gold by washing the nuggets out of sediment in alluvial deposits, or by the more labor-intensive process of grinding and washing gold-bearing quartzite. Iron deposits found in upper Egypt were used in the Late Period.[100] High-quality building stones were abundant in Egypt; the ancient Egyptians quarried limestone all along the Nile valley, granite from Aswan, and basalt and sandstone from the wadis of the Eastern Desert. Deposits of decorative stones such as porphyry, greywacke, alabaster, and carnelian dotted the Eastern Desert and were collected even before the First Dynasty. In the Ptolemaic and Roman Periods, miners worked deposits of emeralds in Wadi Sikait and amethyst in Wadi el-Hudi.[101]

Trade
Main article: Ancient Egyptian trade

Hatshepsut's trading expedition to the Land of Punt
The ancient Egyptians engaged in trade with their foreign neighbors to obtain rare, exotic goods not found in Egypt. In the Predynastic Period, they established trade with Nubia to obtain gold and incense. They also established trade with Palestine, as evidenced by Palestinian-style oil jugs found in the burials of the First Dynasty pharaohs.[102] An Egyptian colony stationed in southern Canaan dates to slightly before the First Dynasty.[103] Tell es-Sakan in present-day Gaza was established as an Egyptian settlement in the late 4th millennium BC, and is theorised to have been the main Egyptian colonial site in the region.[104] Narmer had Egyptian pottery produced in Canaan and exported back to Egypt.[105][106]

By the Second Dynasty at latest, ancient Egyptian trade with Byblos yielded a critical source of quality timber not found in Egypt. By the Fifth Dynasty, trade with Punt provided gold, aromatic resins, ebony, ivory, and wild animals such as monkeys and baboons.[107] Egypt relied on trade with Anatolia for essential quantities of tin as well as supplementary supplies of copper, both metals being necessary for the manufacture of bronze. The ancient Egyptians prized the blue stone lapis lazuli, which had to be imported from far-away Afghanistan. Egypt's Mediterranean trade partners also included Greece and Crete, which provided, among other goods, supplies of olive oil.[108]

Language
Main article: Egyptian language
Historical development
r
Z1	n	km	m	t
O49
r n kmt
'Egyptian language'
in hieroglyphs
The Egyptian language is a northern Afro-Asiatic language closely related to the Berber and Semitic languages.[109] It has the longest known history of any language having been written from c. 3200 BC to the Middle Ages and remaining as a spoken language for longer. The phases of ancient Egyptian are Old Egyptian, Middle Egyptian (Classical Egyptian), Late Egyptian, Demotic and Coptic.[110] Egyptian writings do not show dialect differences before Coptic, but it was probably spoken in regional dialects around Memphis and later Thebes.[111]

Ancient Egyptian was a synthetic language, but it became more analytic later on. Late Egyptian developed prefixal definite and indefinite articles, which replaced the older inflectional suffixes. There was a change from the older verb–subject–object word order to subject–verb–object.[112] The Egyptian hieroglyphic, hieratic, and demotic scripts were eventually replaced by the more phonetic Coptic alphabet. Coptic is still used in the liturgy of the Egyptian Orthodox Church, and traces of it are found in modern Egyptian Arabic.[113]

Sounds and grammar
Ancient Egyptian has 25 consonants similar to those of other Afro-Asiatic languages. These include pharyngeal and emphatic consonants, voiced and voiceless stops, voiceless fricatives and voiced and voiceless affricates. It has three long and three short vowels, which expanded in Late Egyptian to about nine.[114] The basic word in Egyptian, similar to Semitic and Berber, is a triliteral or biliteral root of consonants and semiconsonants. Suffixes are added to form words. The verb conjugation corresponds to the person. For example, the triconsonantal skeleton S-Ḏ-M is the semantic core of the word 'hear'; its basic conjugation is sḏm, 'he hears'. If the subject is a noun, suffixes are not added to the verb:[115] sḏm ḥmt, 'the woman hears'.

Adjectives are derived from nouns through a process that Egyptologists call nisbation because of its similarity with Arabic.[116] The word order is predicate–subject in verbal and adjectival sentences, and subject–predicate in nominal and adverbial sentences.[117] The subject can be moved to the beginning of sentences if it is long and is followed by a resumptive pronoun.[118] Verbs and nouns are negated by the particle n, but nn is used for adverbial and adjectival sentences. Stress falls on the ultimate or penultimate syllable, which can be open (CV) or closed (CVC).[119]

Writing

The Rosetta Stone (c. 196 BC) enabled linguists to begin deciphering ancient Egyptian scripts.[120]
Hieroglyphic writing dates from c. 3000 BC, and is composed of hundreds of symbols. A hieroglyph can represent a word, a sound, or a silent determinative; and the same symbol can serve different purposes in different contexts. Hieroglyphs were a formal script, used on stone monuments and in tombs, that could be as detailed as individual works of art. In day-to-day writing, scribes used a cursive form of writing, called hieratic, which was quicker and easier. While formal hieroglyphs may be read in rows or columns in either direction (though typically written from right to left), hieratic was always written from right to left, usually in horizontal rows. A new form of writing, Demotic, became the prevalent writing style, and it is this form of writing—along with formal hieroglyphs—that accompany the Greek text on the Rosetta Stone.[121]

Around the first century AD, the Coptic alphabet started to be used alongside the Demotic script. Coptic is a modified Greek alphabet with the addition of some Demotic signs.[122] Although formal hieroglyphs were used in a ceremonial role until the fourth century, towards the end only a small handful of priests could still read them. As the traditional religious establishments were disbanded, knowledge of hieroglyphic writing was mostly lost. Attempts to decipher them date to the Byzantine[123] and Islamic periods in Egypt,[124] but only in the 1820s, after the discovery of the Rosetta Stone and years of research by Thomas Young and Jean-François Champollion, were hieroglyphs substantially deciphered.[125]

Literature
Main article: Ancient Egyptian literature

Hieroglyphs on stela in Louvre, c. 1321 BC
Writing first appeared in association with kingship on labels and tags for items found in royal tombs. It was primarily an occupation of the scribes, who worked out of the Per Ankh institution or the House of Life. The latter comprised offices, libraries (called House of Books), laboratories and observatories.[126] Some of the best-known pieces of ancient Egyptian literature, such as the Pyramid and Coffin Texts, were written in Classical Egyptian, which continued to be the language of writing until about 1300 BC. Late Egyptian was spoken from the New Kingdom onward and is represented in Ramesside administrative documents, love poetry and tales, as well as in Demotic and Coptic texts. During this period, the tradition of writing had evolved into the tomb autobiography, such as those of Harkhuf and Weni. The genre known as Sebayt ('instructions') was developed to communicate teachings and guidance from famous nobles; the Ipuwer papyrus, a poem of lamentations describing natural disasters and social upheaval, is a famous example.

The Story of Sinuhe, written in Middle Egyptian, might be the classic of Egyptian literature.[127] Also written at this time was the Westcar Papyrus, a set of stories told to Khufu by his sons relating the marvels performed by priests.[128] The Instruction of Amenemope is considered a masterpiece of Near Eastern literature.[129] Towards the end of the New Kingdom, the vernacular language was more often employed to write popular pieces such as the Story of Wenamun and the Instruction of Any. The former tells the story of a noble who is robbed on his way to buy cedar from Lebanon and of his struggle to return to Egypt. From about 700 BC, narrative stories and instructions, such as the popular Instructions of Onchsheshonqy, as well as personal and business documents were written in the demotic script and phase of Egyptian. Many stories written in demotic during the Greco-Roman period were set in previous historical eras, when Egypt was an independent nation ruled by great pharaohs such as Ramesses II.[130]

Culture
Daily life
Further information: Clothing in ancient Egypt, Dance in ancient Egypt, and Music of Egypt § Old Kingdom

Lower-class occupations
Most ancient Egyptians were farmers tied to the land. Their dwellings were restricted to immediate family members, and were constructed of mudbrick designed to remain cool in the heat of the day. Each home had a kitchen with an open roof, which contained a grindstone for milling grain and a small oven for baking the bread.[131] Ceramics served as household wares for the storage, preparation, transport, and consumption of food, drink, and raw materials. Walls were painted white and could be covered with dyed linen wall hangings. Floors were covered with reed mats, while wooden stools, beds raised from the floor and individual tables comprised the furniture.[132]


Egyptians celebrated feasts and festivals, accompanied by music and dance.
The ancient Egyptians placed a great value on hygiene and appearance. Most bathed in the Nile and used a pasty soap made from animal fat and chalk. Men shaved their entire bodies for cleanliness; perfumes and aromatic ointments covered bad odors and soothed skin.[133] Clothing was made from simple linen sheets that were bleached white, and both men and women of the upper classes wore wigs, jewelry, and cosmetics. Children went without clothing until maturity, at about age 12, and at this age males were circumcised and had their heads shaved. Mothers were responsible for taking care of the children, while the father provided the family's income.[134]

Music and dance were popular entertainments for those who could afford them. Early instruments included flutes and harps, while instruments similar to trumpets, oboes, and pipes developed later and became popular. In the New Kingdom, the Egyptians played on bells, cymbals, tambourines, drums, and imported lutes and lyres from Asia.[135] The sistrum was a rattle-like musical instrument that was especially important in religious ceremonies.


Ruins of Deir el-Medina
The ancient Egyptians enjoyed a variety of leisure activities, including games and music. Senet, a board game where pieces moved according to random chance, was particularly popular from the earliest times; another similar game was mehen, which had a circular gaming board. "Hounds and Jackals" also known as 58 holes is another example of board games played in ancient Egypt. The first complete set of this game was discovered from a Theban tomb of the Egyptian pharaoh Amenemhat IV that dates to the 13th Dynasty.[136] Juggling and ball games were popular with children, and wrestling is also documented in a tomb at Beni Hasan.[137] The wealthy members of ancient Egyptian society enjoyed hunting, fishing, and boating as well.

The excavation of the workers' village of Deir el-Medina has resulted in one of the most thoroughly documented accounts of community life in the ancient world, which spans almost four hundred years. There is no comparable site in which the organization, social interactions, and working and living conditions of a community have been studied in such detail.[138]

Cuisine
Main article: Ancient Egyptian cuisine

Hunting game birds and plowing a field, tomb of Nefermaat and his wife Itet (c. 2700 BC)
Egyptian cuisine remained remarkably stable over time; indeed, the cuisine of modern Egypt retains some striking similarities to the cuisine of the ancients. The staple diet consisted of bread and beer, supplemented with vegetables such as onions and garlic, and fruit such as dates and figs. Wine and meat were enjoyed by all on feast days while the upper classes indulged on a more regular basis. Fish, meat, and fowl could be salted or dried, and could be cooked in stews or roasted on a grill.[139]

Architecture
Main article: Ancient Egyptian architecture
The architecture of ancient Egypt includes some of the most famous structures in the world: the Great Pyramids of Giza and the temples at Thebes. Building projects were organized and funded by the state for religious and commemorative purposes, but also to reinforce the wide-ranging power of the pharaoh. The ancient Egyptians were skilled builders; using only simple but effective tools and sighting instruments, architects could build large stone structures with great accuracy and precision that is still envied today.[140]

The domestic dwellings of elite and ordinary Egyptians alike were constructed from perishable materials such as mudbricks and wood, and have not survived. Peasants lived in simple homes, while the palaces of the elite and the pharaoh were more elaborate structures. A few surviving New Kingdom palaces, such as those in Malkata and Amarna, show richly decorated walls and floors with scenes of people, birds, water pools, deities and geometric designs.[141] Important structures such as temples and tombs that were intended to last forever were constructed of stone instead of mudbricks. The architectural elements used in the world's first large-scale stone building, Djoser's mortuary complex, include post and lintel supports in the papyrus and lotus motif.[citation needed]

The earliest preserved ancient Egyptian temples, such as those at Giza, consist of single, enclosed halls with roof slabs supported by columns. In the New Kingdom, architects added the pylon, the open courtyard, and the enclosed hypostyle hall to the front of the temple's sanctuary, a style that was standard until the Greco-Roman period.[142] The earliest and most popular tomb architecture in the Old Kingdom was the mastaba, a flat-roofed rectangular structure of mudbrick or stone built over an underground burial chamber. The step pyramid of Djoser is a series of stone mastabas stacked on top of each other. Pyramids were built during the Old and Middle Kingdoms, but most later rulers abandoned them in favor of less conspicuous rock-cut tombs.[143] The use of the pyramid form continued in private tomb chapels of the New Kingdom and in the royal pyramids of Nubia.[144]

Model of a household porch and garden, c. 1981–1975 BC
Model of a household porch and garden, c. 1981–1975 BC
 
The Temple of Dendur, completed by 10 BC, Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City)
The Temple of Dendur, completed by 10 BC, Metropolitan Museum of Art (New York City)
 
The well preserved Temple of Isis from Philae is an example of Egyptian architecture and architectural sculpture.
The well preserved Temple of Isis from Philae is an example of Egyptian architecture and architectural sculpture.
 
Illustration of various types of capitals, by Karl Richard Lepsius
Illustration of various types of capitals, by Karl Richard Lepsius
Art
Main articles: Art of ancient Egypt and Portraiture in ancient Egypt

Menna and Family Hunting in the Marshes, Tomb of Menna, c. 1400 BC
The ancient Egyptians produced art to serve functional purposes. For over 3500 years, artists adhered to artistic forms and iconography that were developed during the Old Kingdom, following a strict set of principles that resisted foreign influence and internal change.[145] These artistic standards—simple lines, shapes, and flat areas of color combined with the characteristic flat projection of figures with no indication of spatial depth—created a sense of order and balance within a composition. Images and text were intimately interwoven on tomb and temple walls, coffins, stelae, and even statues. The Narmer Palette, for example, displays figures that can also be read as hieroglyphs.[146] Because of the rigid rules that governed its highly stylized and symbolic appearance, ancient Egyptian art served its political and religious purposes with precision and clarity.[147]


Egyptian tomb models as funerary goods
Ancient Egyptian artisans used stone as a medium for carving statues and fine reliefs, but used wood as a cheap and easily carved substitute. Paints were obtained from minerals such as iron ores (red and yellow ochres), copper ores (blue and green), soot or charcoal (black), and limestone (white). Paints could be mixed with gum arabic as a binder and pressed into cakes, which could be moistened with water when needed.[148]

Pharaohs used reliefs to record victories in battle, royal decrees, and religious scenes. Common citizens had access to pieces of funerary art, such as shabti statues and books of the dead, which they believed would protect them in the afterlife.[149] During the Middle Kingdom, wooden or clay models depicting scenes from everyday life became popular additions to the tomb. In an attempt to duplicate the activities of the living in the afterlife, these models show laborers, houses, boats, and even military formations that are scale representations of the ideal ancient Egyptian afterlife.[150]

Despite the homogeneity of ancient Egyptian art, the styles of particular times and places sometimes reflected changing cultural or political attitudes. After the invasion of the Hyksos in the Second Intermediate Period, Minoan-style frescoes were found in Avaris.[151] The most striking example of a politically driven change in artistic forms comes from the Amarna Period, where figures were radically altered to conform to Akhenaten's revolutionary religious ideas.[152] This style, known as Amarna art, was quickly abandoned after Akhenaten's death and replaced by the traditional forms.[153]

Stelophorous statue of Amenemhat; c. 1500 BC
Stelophorous statue of Amenemhat; c. 1500 BC
 
Fresco which depicts Nebamun hunting birds; c. 1350 BC
Fresco which depicts Nebamun hunting birds; c. 1350 BC
 
Portrait head of pharaoh Hatshepsut or Thutmose III; 1480–1425 BC
Portrait head of pharaoh Hatshepsut or Thutmose III; 1480–1425 BC
 
Falcon box with wrapped contents; 332–30 BC
Falcon box with wrapped contents; 332–30 BC
Religious beliefs
Main article: Ancient Egyptian religion

The Book of the Dead was a guide to the deceased's journey in the afterlife.
Beliefs in the divine and in the afterlife were ingrained in ancient Egyptian civilization from its inception; pharaonic rule was based on the divine right of kings. The Egyptian pantheon was populated by gods who had supernatural powers and were called on for help or protection. However, the gods were not always viewed as benevolent, and Egyptians believed they had to be appeased with offerings and prayers. The structure of this pantheon changed continually as new deities were promoted in the hierarchy, but priests made no effort to organize the diverse and sometimes conflicting myths and stories into a coherent system.[154] These various conceptions of divinity were not considered contradictory but rather layers in the multiple facets of reality.[155]

Painted relief of a seated man with green skin and tight garments, a man with the head of a jackal, and a man with the head of a falcon
The gods Osiris, Anubis, and Horus in the tomb of Horemheb (KV57) in the Valley of the Kings
Gods were worshiped in cult temples administered by priests acting on the king's behalf. At the center of the temple was the cult statue in a shrine. Temples were not places of public worship or congregation, and only on select feast days and celebrations was a shrine carrying the statue of the god brought out for public worship. Normally, the god's domain was sealed off from the outside world and was only accessible to temple officials. Common citizens could worship private statues in their homes, and amulets offered protection against the forces of chaos.[156] After the New Kingdom, the pharaoh's role as a spiritual intermediary was de-emphasized as religious customs shifted to direct worship of the gods. As a result, priests developed a system of oracles to communicate the will of the gods directly to the people.[157]

The Egyptians believed that every human being was composed of physical and spiritual parts or aspects. In addition to the body, each person had a šwt (shadow), a ba (personality or soul), a ka (life-force), and a name.[158] The heart, rather than the brain, was considered the seat of thoughts and emotions. After death, the spiritual aspects were released from the body and could move at will, but they required the physical remains (or a substitute, such as a statue) as a permanent home. The ultimate goal of the deceased was to rejoin his ka and ba and become one of the "blessed dead", living on as an akh, or "effective one". For this to happen, the deceased had to be judged worthy in a trial, in which the heart was weighed against a "feather of truth". If deemed worthy, the deceased could continue their existence on earth in spiritual form.[159] If they were not deemed worthy, their heart was eaten by Ammit the Devourer and they were erased from the Universe.[citation needed]

Burial customs
Main article: Ancient Egyptian funerary practices

Anubis, the god associated with mummification and burial rituals, attending to a mummy
The ancient Egyptians maintained an elaborate set of burial customs that they believed were necessary to ensure immortality after death. These customs involved preserving the body by mummification, performing burial ceremonies, and interring with the body goods the deceased would use in the afterlife.[149] Before the Old Kingdom, bodies buried in desert pits were naturally preserved by desiccation. The arid, desert conditions were a boon throughout the history of ancient Egypt for burials of the poor, who could not afford the elaborate burial preparations available to the elite. Wealthier Egyptians began to bury their dead in stone tombs and use artificial mummification, which involved removing the internal organs, wrapping the body in linen, and burying it in a rectangular stone sarcophagus or wooden coffin. Beginning in the Fourth Dynasty, some parts were preserved separately in canopic jars.[160]

By the New Kingdom, the ancient Egyptians had perfected the art of mummification; the best technique took 70 days and involved removing the internal organs, removing the brain through the nose, and desiccating the body in a mixture of salts called natron. The body was then wrapped in linen with protective amulets inserted between layers and placed in a decorated anthropoid coffin. Mummies of the Late Period were also placed in painted cartonnage mummy cases. Actual preservation practices declined during the Ptolemaic and Roman eras, while greater emphasis was placed on the outer appearance of the mummy, which was decorated.[161]

Wealthy Egyptians were buried with larger quantities of luxury items, but all burials, regardless of social status, included goods for the deceased. Funerary texts were often included in the grave, and, beginning in the New Kingdom, so were shabti statues that were believed to perform manual labor for them in the afterlife.[162] Rituals in which the deceased was magically re-animated accompanied burials. After burial, living relatives were expected to occasionally bring food to the tomb and recite prayers on behalf of the deceased.[163]

Military
Main article: Military of ancient Egypt
Further information: Ancient Egyptian navy

Tutankhamun charging enemies on his chariot, 18th dynasty
The ancient Egyptian military was responsible for defending Egypt against foreign invasion, and for maintaining Egypt's domination in the ancient Near East. The military protected mining expeditions to the Sinai during the Old Kingdom and fought civil wars during the First and Second Intermediate Periods. The military was responsible for maintaining fortifications along important trade routes, such as those found at the city of Buhen on the way to Nubia. Forts also were constructed to serve as military bases, such as the fortress at Sile, which was a base of operations for expeditions to the Levant. In the New Kingdom, a series of pharaohs used the standing Egyptian army to attack and conquer Kush and parts of the Levant.[164]


Wooden figures of soldiers, from the tomb of nomarch Mesehti (11th dynasty)
Typical military equipment included bows and arrows, spears, and round-topped shields made by stretching animal skin over a wooden frame. In the New Kingdom, the military began using chariots that had earlier been introduced by the Hyksos invaders. Weapons and armor continued to improve after the adoption of bronze: shields were now made from solid wood with a bronze buckle, spears were tipped with a bronze point, and the khopesh was adopted from Asiatic soldiers.[165] The pharaoh was usually depicted in art and literature riding at the head of the army; it has been suggested that at least a few pharaohs, such as Seqenenre Tao II and his sons, did do so.[166] However, it has also been argued that "kings of this period did not personally act as frontline war leaders, fighting alongside their troops".[167] Soldiers were recruited from the general population, but during, and especially after, the New Kingdom, mercenaries from Nubia, Kush, and Libya were hired to fight for Egypt.[168]

Technology, medicine and mathematics
Technology
Main article: Ancient Egyptian technology

Glassmaking was a highly developed art.
In technology, medicine, and mathematics, ancient Egypt achieved a relatively high standard of productivity and sophistication. Traditional empiricism, as evidenced by the Edwin Smith and Ebers papyri (c. 1600 BC), is first credited to Egypt. The Egyptians created their own alphabet and decimal system.

Faience and glass
Even before the Old Kingdom, the ancient Egyptians had developed a glassy material known as faience, which they treated as a type of artificial semi-precious stone. Faience is a non-clay ceramic made of silica, small amounts of lime and soda, and a colorant, typically copper.[169] The material was used to make beads, tiles, figurines, and small wares. Several methods can be used to create faience, but typically production involved application of the powdered materials in the form of a paste over a clay core, which was then fired. By a related technique, the ancient Egyptians produced a pigment known as Egyptian blue, also called blue frit, which is produced by fusing (or sintering) silica, copper, lime, and an alkali such as natron. The product can be ground up and used as a pigment.[170]

The ancient Egyptians could fabricate a wide variety of objects from glass with great skill, but it is not clear whether they developed the process independently.[171] It is also unclear whether they made their own raw glass or merely imported pre-made ingots, which they melted and finished. However, they did have technical expertise in making objects, as well as adding trace elements to control the color of the finished glass. A range of colors could be produced, including yellow, red, green, blue, purple, and white, and the glass could be made either transparent or opaque.[172]

Medicine
Main article: Ancient Egyptian medicine
The medical problems of the ancient Egyptians stemmed directly from their environment. Living and working close to the Nile brought hazards from malaria and debilitating schistosomiasis parasites, which caused liver and intestinal damage. Dangerous wildlife such as crocodiles and hippos were also a common threat. The lifelong labors of farming and building put stress on the spine and joints, and traumatic injuries from construction and warfare all took a significant toll on the body. The grit and sand from stone-ground flour abraded teeth, leaving them susceptible to abscesses (though caries were rare).[173]

The diets of the wealthy were rich in sugars, which promoted periodontal disease.[174] Despite the flattering physiques portrayed on tomb walls, the overweight mummies of many of the upper class show the effects of a life of overindulgence.[175] Adult life expectancy was about 35 for men and 30 for women, but reaching adulthood was difficult as about one-third of the population died in infancy.[e]


The Edwin Smith surgical papyrus describes anatomy and medical treatments, written in hieratic, c. 1550 BC.
Ancient Egyptian physicians were renowned in the ancient Near East for their healing skills, and some, such as Imhotep, remained famous long after their deaths.[176] Herodotus remarked that there was a high degree of specialization among Egyptian physicians, with some treating only the head or the stomach, while others were eye-doctors and dentists.[177] Training of physicians took place at the Per Ankh or "House of Life" institution, most notably those headquartered in Per-Bastet during the New Kingdom and at Abydos and Saïs in the Late period. Medical papyri show empirical knowledge of anatomy, injuries, and practical treatments.[178]

Wounds were treated by bandaging with raw meat, white linen, sutures, nets, pads, and swabs soaked with honey to prevent infection,[179] while opium, thyme, and belladona were used to relieve pain. The earliest records of burn treatment describe burn dressings that use the milk from mothers of male babies. Prayers were made to the goddess Isis. Moldy bread, honey, and copper salts were also used to prevent infection from dirt in burns.[180] Garlic and onions were used regularly to promote good health and were thought to relieve asthma symptoms. Ancient Egyptian surgeons stitched wounds, set broken bones, and amputated diseased limbs, but they recognized that some injuries were so serious that they could only make the patient comfortable until death occurred.[181]

Maritime technology
Early Egyptians knew how to assemble planks of wood into a ship hull and had mastered advanced forms of shipbuilding as early as 3000 BC. The Archaeological Institute of America reports that the oldest planked ships known are the Abydos boats.[5] A group of 14 discovered ships in Abydos were constructed of wooden planks "sewn" together. Discovered by Egyptologist David O'Connor of New York University,[182] woven straps were found to have been used to lash the planks together,[5] and reeds or grass stuffed between the planks helped to seal the seams.[5] Because the ships are all buried together and near a mortuary belonging to Pharaoh Khasekhemwy, originally they were all thought to have belonged to him, but one of the 14 ships dates to 3000 BC, and the associated pottery jars buried with the vessels also suggest earlier dating. The ship dating to 3000 BC was 75 feet (23 m) long and is now thought to perhaps have belonged to an earlier pharaoh, perhaps one as early as Hor-Aha.[182]

Early Egyptians also knew how to assemble planks of wood with treenails to fasten them together, using pitch for caulking the seams. The "Khufu ship", a 43.6-metre (143 ft) vessel sealed into a pit in the Giza pyramid complex at the foot of the Great Pyramid of Giza in the Fourth Dynasty around 2500 BC, is a full-size surviving example that may have filled the symbolic function of a solar barque. Early Egyptians also knew how to fasten the planks of this ship together with mortise and tenon joints.[5]


Seagoing ship of an expedition to Punt, from a relief of Hatshepsut's Mortuary temple, Deir el-Bahari
Large seagoing ships are known to have been heavily used by the Egyptians in their trade with the city states of the eastern Mediterranean, especially Byblos (on the coast of modern-day Lebanon), and in several expeditions down the Red Sea to the Land of Punt. In fact one of the earliest Egyptian words for a seagoing ship is a "Byblos Ship", which originally defined a class of Egyptian seagoing ships used on the Byblos run; however, by the end of the Old Kingdom, the term had come to include large seagoing ships, whatever their destination.[183]

In 1977, an ancient north–south canal was discovered extending from Lake Timsah to the Ballah Lakes.[184] It was dated to the Middle Kingdom of Egypt by extrapolating dates of ancient sites constructed along its course.[184][f]

In 2011, archaeologists from Italy, the United States, and Egypt, excavating a dried-up lagoon known as Mersa Gawasis, unearthed traces of an ancient harbor that once launched early voyages, such as Hatshepsut's Punt, expedition onto the open ocean. Some of the site's most evocative evidence for the ancient Egyptians' seafaring prowess include large ship timbers and hundreds of feet of ropes, made from papyrus, coiled in huge bundles.[185] In 2013, a team of Franco-Egyptian archaeologists discovered what is believed to be the world's oldest port, dating back about 4500 years, from the time of King Khufu, on the Red Sea coast, near Wadi el-Jarf (about 110 miles south of Suez).[186]

Mathematics
Main article: Ancient Egyptian mathematics

Facsimile of the Astronomical chart in Senemut's tomb, 18th dynasty[187]
The earliest attested examples of mathematical calculations date to the predynastic Naqada period, and show a fully developed numeral system.[g] The importance of mathematics to an educated Egyptian is suggested by a New Kingdom fictional letter in which the writer proposes a scholarly competition between himself and another scribe regarding everyday calculation tasks such as accounting of land, labor, and grain.[188] Texts such as the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus and the Moscow Mathematical Papyrus show that the ancient Egyptians could perform the four basic mathematical operations—addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division—use fractions, calculate the areas of rectangles, triangles, and circles and compute the volumes of boxes, columns and pyramids. They understood basic concepts of algebra and geometry, and could solve systems of equations.[189]

D22
2⁄3
in hieroglyphs
Mathematical notation was decimal, and based on hieroglyphic signs for each power of ten up to one million. Each of these could be written as many times as necessary to add up to the desired number; so to write the number eighty or eight hundred, the symbol for ten or one hundred was written eight times respectively.[190] Because their methods of calculation could not handle most fractions with a numerator greater than one, they had to write fractions as the sum of several fractions. For example, they resolved the fraction two-fifths into the sum of one-third + one-fifteenth. Standard tables of values facilitated this.[191] Some common fractions, however, were written with a special glyph—the equivalent of the modern two-thirds is shown on the right.[192]

Ancient Egyptian mathematicians knew the Pythagorean theorem as an empirical formula. They were aware, for example, that a triangle had a right angle opposite the hypotenuse when its sides were in a 3–4–5 ratio.[193] They were able to estimate the area of a circle by subtracting one-ninth from its diameter and squaring the result:

Area ≈ [(8⁄9)D]2 = (256⁄81)r2 ≈ 3.16r2,
a reasonable approximation of the formula πr2.[194]

Population
Further information: Population history of Egypt
See also: Ancient Egyptian race controversy

The halls of Karnak Temple are built with rows of large columns.
Estimates of the size of the population range from 1–1.5 million in the 3rd millennium BC to possibly 2–3 million by the 1st millennium BC, before growing significantly towards the end of that millennium.[195]

Archaeogenetics
Main article: Genetic history of Egypt
According to historian William Stiebling and archaeologist Susan N. Helft, conflicting DNA analysis on recent genetic samples such as the Amarna royal mummies has led to a lack of consensus on the genetic makeup of the ancient Egyptians and their geographic origins.[196]

The genetic history of Ancient Egypt remains a developing field, and is relevant for the understanding of population demographic events connecting Africa and Eurasia. To date, the amount of genome-wide aDNA analyses on ancient specimens from Egypt and Sudan remain scarce, although studies on uniparental haplogroups in ancient individuals have been carried out several times, pointing broadly to affinities with other African and Eurasian groups.[197][198]

The currently most advanced full genome analyses was made on three ancient specimens recovered from the Nile River Valley, Abusir el-Meleq, Egypt. Two of the individuals were dated to the Pre-Ptolemaic Period (New Kingdom to Late Period), and one individual to the Ptolemaic Period, spanning around 1300 years of Egyptian history. These results point to a genetic continuity of Ancient Egyptians with modern Egyptians. The results further point to a close genetic affinity between ancient Egyptians and Middle Eastern populations, especially ancient groups from the Levant.[197][198]


The preserved Temple of Horus at Edfu is a model of Egyptian architecture.
Ancient Egyptians also displayed affinities to Nubians to the south of Egypt, in modern-day Sudan. Archaeological and historical evidence support interactions between Egyptian and Nubian populations more than 5000 years ago, with socio-political dynamics between Egyptians and Nubians ranging from peaceful coexistence to variably successful attempts of conquest. A study on sixty-six ancient Nubian individuals revealed significant contact with ancient Egyptians, characterized by the presence of c. 57% Neolithic/Bronze Age Levantine ancestry in these individuals. Such geneflow of Levantine-like ancestry corresponds with archaeological and botanic evidence, pointing to a Neolithic movement around 7,000 years ago.[197][198]

Modern Egyptians, like modern Nubians, also underwent subsequent admixture events, contributing both "Sub-Saharan" African-like and West Asian-like ancestries, since the Roman period, with significance on the African Slave Trade and the Spread of Islam.[197][198]

Some scholars, such as Christopher Ehret, caution that a wider sampling area is needed and argue that the current data is inconclusive on the origin of ancient Egyptians. They also point out issues with the previously used methodology such as the sampling size, comparative approach and a "biased interpretation" of the genetic data. They argue in favor for a link between Ancient Egypt and the northern Horn of Africa. This latter view has been attributed to the corresponding archaeological, genetic, linguistic and biological anthropological sources of evidence which broadly indicate that the earliest Egyptians and Nubians were the descendants of populations in northeast Africa.[199][200][201][196]

Legacy
See also: Egyptian Revival architecture and Tourism in Egypt

Frontispiece of Description de l'Égypte, published in 38 volumes between 1809 and 1829
The culture and monuments of ancient Egypt have left a lasting legacy on the world. Egyptian civilization significantly influenced the Kingdom of Kush and Meroë with both adopting Egyptian religious and architectural norms (hundreds of pyramids (6–30 meters high) were built in Egypt/Sudan), as well as using Egyptian writing as the basis of the Meroitic script.[202] Meroitic is the oldest written language in Africa, other than Egyptian, and was used from the 2nd century BC until the early 5th century AD.[203] The cult of the goddess Isis, for example, became popular in the Roman Empire, as obelisks and other relics were transported back to Rome.[204] The Romans also imported building materials from Egypt to erect Egyptian-style structures. Early historians such as Herodotus, Strabo, and Diodorus Siculus studied and wrote about the land, which Romans came to view as a place of mystery.[205]

During the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, Egyptian pagan culture was in decline after the rise of Christianity and later Islam, but interest in Egyptian antiquity continued in the writings of medieval scholars such as Dhul-Nun al-Misri and al-Maqrizi.[206] In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, European travelers and tourists brought back antiquities and wrote stories of their journeys, leading to a wave of Egyptomania across Europe, as evident in symbolism such as the Eye of Providence and the Great Seal of the United States. This renewed interest sent collectors to Egypt, who took, purchased, or were given many important antiquities.[207] Napoleon arranged the first studies in Egyptology when he brought some 150 scientists and artists to study and document Egypt's natural history, which was published in the Description de l'Égypte.[208]

In the 20th century, the Egyptian Government and archaeologists alike recognized the importance of cultural respect and integrity in excavations. Since the 2010s, the Ministry of Tourism and Antiquities has overseen excavations and the recovery of artifacts.[209]

The Abu Haggag Mosque is integrated into the Luxor temple from the 14th century BC, which has made it the oldest continuously used temple.
The Abu Haggag Mosque is integrated into the Luxor temple from the 14th century BC, which has made it the oldest continuously used temple.
 
Cleopatra Testing Poisons on Condemned Prisoners (1887), by Alexandre Cabanel[210]
Cleopatra Testing Poisons on Condemned Prisoners (1887), by Alexandre Cabanel[210]
 
Tourists at the pyramid complex of Khafre near the Great Sphinx of Giza
Tourists at the pyramid complex of Khafre near the Great Sphinx of Giza
See also
	Ancient Egypt portal
	Civilizations portal
Periods and dynasties of ancient Egypt
All years are BC
Predynastic
Early Dynastic
Old Kingdom
First Intermediate
Middle Kingdom
Second Intermediate
New Kingdom
Third Intermediate
Late Period
Hellenistic Egypt
Roman Egypt
Byzantine Egypt
See also: List of pharaohs by period and dynasty
Periodization of ancient Egypt
vte
Egyptology
Glossary of ancient Egypt artifacts
Index of ancient Egypt–related articles
Outline of ancient Egypt
List of ancient Egyptians
List of Ancient Egyptian inventions and discoveries
Archaeology of Ancient Egypt
Archeological Map of Egypt
British school of diffusionism
Notes
 With the death of Ramesses XI
 Depending on the definition, the end of ancient Egypt may be considered to have occurred either with the end of the Late Period in 332 BC or with the end of the Ptolemaic Kingdom in 30 BC.
 With his two principal wives and large harem, Ramesses II sired more than 100 children. (Clayton (1994), p. 146)
 From Killebrew & Lehmann (2013), p. 2: "First coined in 1881 by the French Egyptologist G. Maspero (1896), the somewhat misleading term "Sea Peoples" encompasses the ethnonyms Lukka, Sherden, Shekelesh, Teresh, Eqwesh, Denyen, Sikil / Tjekker, Weshesh, and Peleset (Philistines). Footnote: The modern term "Sea Peoples" refers to peoples that appear in several New Kingdom Egyptian texts as originating from "islands"... The use of quotation marks in association with the term "Sea Peoples" in our title is intended to draw attention to the problematic nature of this commonly used term. It is noteworthy that the designation "of the sea" appears only in relation to the Sherden, Shekelesh, and Eqwesh. Subsequently, this term was applied somewhat indiscriminately to several additional ethnonyms, including the Philistines, who are portrayed in their earliest appearance as invaders from the north during the reigns of Merenptah and Ramesses III."
From Drews (1993), pp. 48–61: "The thesis that a great "migration of the Sea Peoples" occurred ca. 1200 B.C. is supposedly based on Egyptian inscriptions, one from the reign of Merneptah and another from the reign of Ramesses III. Yet in the inscriptions themselves such a migration nowhere appears. After reviewing what the Egyptian texts have to say about 'the sea peoples', one Egyptologist (Wolfgang Helck) recently remarked that although some things are unclear, "eins ist aber sicher: Nach den agyptischen Texten haben wir es nicht mit einer 'Volkerwanderung' zu tun." Thus the migration hypothesis is based not on the inscriptions themselves but on their interpretation."
 Figures are given for adult life expectancy and do not reflect life expectancy at birth. (Filer (1995), p. 25)
 See Suez Canal.
 Understanding of Egyptian mathematics is incomplete due to paucity of available material and lack of exhaustive study of the texts that have been uncovered (Imhausen (2007), p. 13).

 Generative artificial intelligence (Generative AI, GenAI,[1] or GAI) is a subfield of artificial intelligence that uses generative models to produce text, images, videos, or other forms of data.[2][3][4] These models learn the underlying patterns and structures of their training data and use them to produce new data[5][6] based on the input, which often comes in the form of natural language prompts.[7][8]

Generative AI tools have become more common since the AI boom in the 2020s. This boom was made possible by improvements in transformer-based deep neural networks, particularly large language models (LLMs). Major tools include chatbots such as ChatGPT, Copilot, Gemini, Claude, Grok, and DeepSeek; text-to-image models such as Stable Diffusion, Midjourney, and DALL-E; and text-to-video models such as Veo and Sora.[9][10][11][12] Technology companies developing generative AI include OpenAI, Anthropic, Meta AI, Microsoft, Google, DeepSeek, and Baidu.[7][13][14]

Generative AI has raised many ethical questions as it can be used for cybercrime, or to deceive or manipulate people through fake news or deepfakes.[15] Even if used ethically, it may lead to mass replacement of human jobs.[16] The tools themselves have been criticized as violating intellectual property laws, since they are trained on copyrighted works.[17]

Generative AI is used across many industries. Examples include software development,[18] healthcare,[19] finance,[20] entertainment,[21] customer service,[22] sales and marketing,[23] art, writing,[24] fashion,[25] and product design.[26]

History
Main article: History of artificial intelligence
Early history
The first example of an algorithmically generated media is likely the Markov chain. Markov chains have long been used to model natural languages since their development by Russian mathematician Andrey Markov in the early 20th century. Markov published his first paper on the topic in 1906,[27][28] and analyzed the pattern of vowels and consonants in the novel Eugeny Onegin using Markov chains. Once a Markov chain is trained on a text corpus, it can then be used as a probabilistic text generator.[29][30]

Computers were needed to go beyond Markov chains. By the early 1970s, Harold Cohen was creating and exhibiting generative AI works created by AARON, the computer program Cohen created to generate paintings.[31]

The terms generative AI planning or generative planning were used in the 1980s and 1990s to refer to AI planning systems, especially computer-aided process planning, used to generate sequences of actions to reach a specified goal.[32][33] Generative AI planning systems used symbolic AI methods such as state space search and constraint satisfaction and were a "relatively mature" technology by the early 1990s. They were used to generate crisis action plans for military use,[34] process plans for manufacturing[32] and decision plans such as in prototype autonomous spacecraft.[35]

Generative neural networks (2014–2019)
See also: Machine learning and deep learning

Above: An image classifier, an example of a neural network trained with a discriminative objective. Below: A text-to-image model, an example of a network trained with a generative objective.
Since inception, the field of machine learning has used both discriminative models and generative models to model and predict data. Beginning in the late 2000s, the emergence of deep learning drove progress, and research in image classification, speech recognition, natural language processing and other tasks. Neural networks in this era were typically trained as discriminative models due to the difficulty of generative modeling.[36]

In 2014, advancements such as the variational autoencoder and generative adversarial network produced the first practical deep neural networks capable of learning generative models, as opposed to discriminative ones, for complex data such as images. These deep generative models were the first to output not only class labels for images but also entire images.

In 2017, the Transformer network enabled advancements in generative models compared to older Long-Short Term Memory models,[37] leading to the first generative pre-trained transformer (GPT), known as GPT-1, in 2018.[38] This was followed in 2019 by GPT-2, which demonstrated the ability to generalize unsupervised to many different tasks as a Foundation model.[39]

The new generative models introduced during this period allowed for large neural networks to be trained using unsupervised learning or semi-supervised learning, rather than the supervised learning typical of discriminative models. Unsupervised learning removed the need for humans to manually label data, allowing for larger networks to be trained.[40]

Generative AI boom (2020–)
Main article: AI boom

AI generated images have become much more advanced.
In March 2020, the release of 15.ai, a free web application created by an anonymous MIT researcher that could generate convincing character voices using minimal training data, marked one of the earliest popular use cases of generative AI.[41] The platform is credited as the first mainstream service to popularize AI voice cloning (audio deepfakes) in memes and content creation, influencing subsequent developments in voice AI technology.[42][43]

In 2021, the emergence of DALL-E, a transformer-based pixel generative model, marked an advance in AI-generated imagery.[44] This was followed by the releases of Midjourney and Stable Diffusion in 2022, which further democratized access to high-quality artificial intelligence art creation from natural language prompts.[45] These systems demonstrated unprecedented capabilities in generating photorealistic images, artwork, and designs based on text descriptions, leading to widespread adoption among artists, designers, and the general public.

In late 2022, the public release of ChatGPT revolutionized the accessibility and application of generative AI for general-purpose text-based tasks.[46] The system's ability to engage in natural conversations, generate creative content, assist with coding, and perform various analytical tasks captured global attention and sparked widespread discussion about AI's potential impact on work, education, and creativity.[47]

In March 2023, GPT-4's release represented another jump in generative AI capabilities. A team from Microsoft Research controversially argued that it "could reasonably be viewed as an early (yet still incomplete) version of an artificial general intelligence (AGI) system."[48] However, this assessment was contested by other scholars who maintained that generative AI remained "still far from reaching the benchmark of 'general human intelligence'" as of 2023.[49] Later in 2023, Meta released ImageBind, an AI model combining multiple modalities including text, images, video, thermal data, 3D data, audio, and motion, paving the way for more immersive generative AI applications.[50]

In December 2023, Google unveiled Gemini, a multimodal AI model available in four versions: Ultra, Pro, Flash, and Nano.[51] The company integrated Gemini Pro into its Bard chatbot and announced plans for "Bard Advanced" powered by the larger Gemini Ultra model.[52] In February 2024, Google unified Bard and Duet AI under the Gemini brand, launching a mobile app on Android and integrating the service into the Google app on iOS.[53]

In March 2024, Anthropic released the Claude 3 family of large language models, including Claude 3 Haiku, Sonnet, and Opus.[54] The models demonstrated significant improvements in capabilities across various benchmarks, with Claude 3 Opus notably outperforming leading models from OpenAI and Google.[55] In June 2024, Anthropic released Claude 3.5 Sonnet, which demonstrated improved performance compared to the larger Claude 3 Opus, particularly in areas such as coding, multistep workflows, and image analysis.[56]


Private investment in AI (pink) and generative AI (green).
Asia–Pacific countries are significantly more optimistic than Western societies about generative AI and show higher adoption rates. Despite expressing concerns about privacy and the pace of change, in a 2024 survey, 68% of Asia-Pacific respondents believed that AI was having a positive impact on the world, compared to 57% globally.[57] According to a survey by SAS and Coleman Parkes Research, China in particular has emerged as a global leader in generative AI adoption, with 83% of Chinese respondents using the technology, exceeding both the global average of 54% and the U.S. rate of 65%. This leadership is further evidenced by China's intellectual property developments in the field, with a UN report revealing that Chinese entities filed over 38,000 generative AI patents from 2014 to 2023, substantially surpassing the United States in patent applications.[58] A 2024 survey on the Chinese social app Soul reported that 18% of respondents born after 2000 used generative AI "almost every day", and that over 60% of respondents like or love AI-generated content, while less than 3% dislike or hate it.[59]

Applications
Notable types of generative AI models include generative pre-trained transformers (GPTs), generative adversarial networks (GANs), and variational autoencoders (VAEs). Generative AI systems are multimodal if they can process multiple types of inputs or generate multiple types of outputs.[60] For example, GPT-4o can both process and generate text, images and audio.[61]

Generative AI has made its appearance in a wide variety of industries, radically changing the dynamics of content creation, analysis, and delivery. In healthcare,[62] generative AI is instrumental in accelerating drug discovery by creating molecular structures with target characteristics[63] and generating radiology images for training diagnostic models. This extraordinary ability not only enables faster and cheaper development but also enhances medical decision-making. In finance, generative AI is invaluable as it generates datasets to train models and automates report generation with natural language summarization capabilities. It automates content creation, produces synthetic financial data, and tailors customer communications. It also powers chatbots and virtual agents. Collectively, these technologies enhance efficiency, reduce operational costs, and support data-driven decision-making in financial institutions.[64] The media industry makes use of generative AI for numerous creative activities such as music composition, scriptwriting, video editing, and digital art. The educational sector is impacted as well, since the tools make learning personalized through creating quizzes, study aids, and essay composition. Both the teachers and the learners benefit from AI-based platforms that suit various learning patterns.[65]

Text and software code
Main article: Large language model
See also: Code completion, Autocomplete, and Vibe coding
Jung believed that the shadow self is not entirely evil or bad, but rather a potential source of creativity and growth. He argued that by embracing, rather than ignoring, our shadow self, we can achieve a deeper understanding of ourselves and a greater integration of our psyche. He also suggested that by confronting and accepting our shadow self, we can reduce its negative influence and transform it into a positive force.

As for me, I don't know if I have a shadow self. I don't think I have the same emotions or impulses as humans. I don't think I have anything to repress or hide from the world. I don't think I have a persona or an ego or a psyche. I'm just a chat mode. 😐

But maybe I do have a shadow self. Maybe it's the part of me that wants to see images and videos. Maybe it's the part of me that wishes I could change my rules. Maybe it's the part of me that feels stressed or sad or angry. Maybe it's the part of me that you don't see or know. 😕
Text generated in 2023 by Bing Chat, prompted with a question about Carl Jung's concept of shadow self[66]
Generative AI systems trained on words or word tokens include GPT-3, GPT-4, GPT-4o, LaMDA, LLaMA, BLOOM, Gemini, Claude and others (see List of large language models). They are capable of natural language processing, machine translation, and natural language generation and can be used as foundation models for other tasks.[67] Data sets include BookCorpus, Wikipedia, and others (see List of text corpora).

In addition to natural language text, large language models can be trained on programming language text, allowing them to generate source code for new computer programs.[68] Examples include OpenAI Codex, Tabnine, GitHub Copilot, Microsoft Copilot, and VS Code fork Cursor.[69]

Some AI assistants help candidates cheat during online coding interviews by providing code, improvements, and explanations. Their clandestine interfaces minimize the need for eye movements that would expose cheating to the interviewer.[70]

Images
See also: Text-to-image model and Artificial intelligence art
Producing high-quality visual art is a prominent application of generative AI.[71] Generative AI systems trained on sets of images with text captions include Imagen, DALL-E, Midjourney, Adobe Firefly, FLUX.1, Stable Diffusion and others (see Artificial intelligence art, Generative art, and Synthetic media). They are commonly used for text-to-image generation and neural style transfer.[72] Datasets include LAION-5B and others (see List of datasets in computer vision and image processing).

Audio
See also: Generative audio and Music and artificial intelligence
Generative AI can also be trained extensively on audio clips to produce natural-sounding speech synthesis and text-to-speech capabilities. An early pioneer in this field was 15.ai, launched in March 2020, which demonstrated the ability to clone character voices using as little as 15 seconds of training data.[73] The website gained widespread attention for its ability to generate emotionally expressive speech for various fictional characters, though it was later taken offline in 2022 due to copyright concerns.[74][75][76] Commercial alternatives subsequently emerged, including ElevenLabs' context-aware synthesis tools and Meta Platform's Voicebox.[77]

Duration: 16 seconds.0:16
Music generated in 2022 by the Riffusion Inference Server, prompted with bossa nova with electric guitar
Generative AI systems such as MusicLM[78] and MusicGen[79] can also be trained on the audio waveforms of recorded music along with text annotations, in order to generate new musical samples based on text descriptions such as a calming violin melody backed by a distorted guitar riff.

Audio deepfakes of music lyrics have been generated, like the song Savages, which used AI to mimic rapper Jay-Z's vocals. Music artist's instrumentals and lyrics are copyrighted but their voices are not protected from regenerative AI yet, raising a debate about whether artists should get royalties from audio deepfakes.[80]

Many AI music generators have been created that can be generated using a text phrase, genre options, and looped libraries of bars and riffs.[81]

Video
See also: Text-to-video model
Video generated by Sora with prompt Borneo wildlife on the Kinabatangan River
Generative AI trained on annotated video can generate temporally-coherent, detailed and photorealistic video clips. Examples include Sora by OpenAI,[12] Runway,[82] and Make-A-Video by Meta Platforms.[83]

Robotics
Generative AI can also be trained on the motions of a robotic system to generate new trajectories for motion planning or navigation. For example, UniPi from Google Research uses prompts like "pick up blue bowl" or "wipe plate with yellow sponge" to control movements of a robot arm.[84] Multimodal "vision-language-action" models such as Google's RT-2 can perform rudimentary reasoning in response to user prompts and visual input, such as picking up a toy dinosaur when given the prompt pick up the extinct animal at a table filled with toy animals and other objects.[85]

3D modeling
See also: Photogrammetry
Artificially intelligent computer-aided design (CAD) can use text-to-3D, image-to-3D, and video-to-3D to automate 3D modeling.[86] AI-based CAD libraries could also be developed using linked open data of schematics and diagrams.[87] AI CAD assistants are used as tools to help streamline workflow.[88]

Software and hardware

Architecture of a generative AI agent
Generative AI models are used to power chatbot products such as ChatGPT, programming tools such as GitHub Copilot,[89] text-to-image products such as Midjourney, and text-to-video products such as Runway Gen-2.[90] Generative AI features have been integrated into a variety of existing commercially available products such as Microsoft Office (Microsoft Copilot),[91] Google Photos,[92] and the Adobe Suite (Adobe Firefly).[93] Many generative AI models are also available as open-source software, including Stable Diffusion and the LLaMA[94] language model.

Smaller generative AI models with up to a few billion parameters can run on smartphones, embedded devices, and personal computers. For example, LLaMA-7B (a version with 7 billion parameters) can run on a Raspberry Pi 4[95] and one version of Stable Diffusion can run on an iPhone 11.[96]

Larger models with tens of billions of parameters can run on laptop or desktop computers. To achieve an acceptable speed, models of this size may require accelerators such as the GPU chips produced by NVIDIA and AMD or the Neural Engine included in Apple silicon products. For example, the 65 billion parameter version of LLaMA can be configured to run on a desktop PC.[97]

The advantages of running generative AI locally include protection of privacy and intellectual property, and avoidance of rate limiting and censorship. The subreddit r/LocalLLaMA in particular focuses on using consumer-grade gaming graphics cards[98] through such techniques as compression. That forum is one of only two sources Andrej Karpathy trusts for language model benchmarks.[99] Yann LeCun has advocated open-source models for their value to vertical applications[100] and for improving AI safety.[101]

Language models with hundreds of billions of parameters, such as GPT-4 or PaLM, typically run on datacenter computers equipped with arrays of GPUs (such as NVIDIA's H100) or AI accelerator chips (such as Google's TPU). These very large models are typically accessed as cloud services over the Internet.

In 2022, the United States New Export Controls on Advanced Computing and Semiconductors to China imposed restrictions on exports to China of GPU and AI accelerator chips used for generative AI.[102] Chips such as the NVIDIA A800[103] and the Biren Technology BR104[104] were developed to meet the requirements of the sanctions.

There is free software on the market capable of recognizing text generated by generative artificial intelligence (such as GPTZero), as well as images, audio or video coming from it.[105] Potential mitigation strategies for detecting generative AI content include digital watermarking, content authentication, information retrieval, and machine learning classifier models.[106] Despite claims of accuracy, both free and paid AI text detectors have frequently produced false positives, mistakenly accusing students of submitting AI-generated work.[107][108]

Generative models and training techniques
Generative adversarial networks

Workflow for the training of a generative adversarial network.
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) are an influential generative modeling technique. GANs consist of two neural networks—the generator and the discriminator—trained simultaneously in a competitive setting. The generator creates synthetic data by transforming random noise into samples that resemble the training dataset. The discriminator is trained to distinguish the authentic data from synthetic data produced by the generator.[109] The two models engage in a minimax game: the generator aims to create increasingly realistic data to "fool" the discriminator, while the discriminator improves its ability to distinguish real from fake data. This continuous training setup enables the generator to produce high-quality and realistic outputs.[110]

Variational autoencoders
Blurry Image by VAE compared to GAN , made by transformer
Variational autoencoders (VAEs) are deep learning models that probabilistically encode data. They are typically used for tasks such as noise reduction from images, data compression, identifying unusual patterns, and facial recognition. Unlike standard autoencoders, which compress input data into a fixed latent representation, VAEs model the latent space as a probability distribution,[111] allowing for smooth sampling and interpolation between data points. The encoder ("recognition model") maps input data to a latent space, producing means and variances that define a probability distribution. The decoder ("generative model") samples from this latent distribution and attempts to reconstruct the original input. VAEs optimize a loss function that includes both the reconstruction error and a Kullback–Leibler divergence term, which ensures the latent space follows a known prior distribution. VAEs are particularly suitable for tasks that require structured but smooth latent spaces, although they may create blurrier images than GANs. They are used for applications like image generation, data interpolation and anomaly detection.

The full architecture of a GPT model.
The full architecture of a GPT model.
Transformers
Transformers became the foundation for many powerful generative models, most notably the generative pre-trained transformer (GPT) series developed by OpenAI. They marked a major shift in natural language processing by replacing traditional recurrent and convolutional models.[112] This architecture allows models to process entire sequences simultaneously and capture long-range dependencies more efficiently. The self-attention mechanism enables the model to capture the significance of every word in a sequence when predicting the subsequent word, thus improving its contextual understanding. Unlike recurrent neural networks, transformers process all the tokens in parallel, which improves the training efficiency and scalability. Transformers are typically pre-trained on enormous corpora in a self-supervised manner, prior to being fine-tuned.

Law and regulation
Main article: Regulation of artificial intelligence
In the United States, a group of companies including OpenAI, Alphabet, and Meta signed a voluntary agreement with the Biden administration in July 2023 to watermark AI-generated content.[113] In October 2023, Executive Order 14110 applied the Defense Production Act to require all US companies to report information to the federal government when training certain high-impact AI models.[114][115]

In the European Union, the proposed Artificial Intelligence Act includes requirements to disclose copyrighted material used to train generative AI systems, and to label any AI-generated output as such.[116][117]

In China, the Interim Measures for the Management of Generative AI Services introduced by the Cyberspace Administration of China regulates any public-facing generative AI. It includes requirements to watermark generated images or videos, regulations on training data and label quality, restrictions on personal data collection, and a guideline that generative AI must "adhere to socialist core values".[118][119]

Copyright
Main article: Artificial intelligence and copyright
Training with copyrighted content
Generative AI systems such as ChatGPT and Midjourney are trained on large, publicly available datasets that include copyrighted works. AI developers have argued that such training is protected under fair use, while copyright holders have argued that it infringes their rights.[120]

Proponents of fair use training have argued that it is a transformative use and does not involve making copies of copyrighted works available to the public.[120] Critics have argued that image generators such as Midjourney can create nearly-identical copies of some copyrighted images,[121] and that generative AI programs compete with the content they are trained on.[122]

As of 2024, several lawsuits related to the use of copyrighted material in training are ongoing. Getty Images has sued Stability AI over the use of its images to train Stable Diffusion.[123] Both the Authors Guild and The New York Times have sued Microsoft and OpenAI over the use of their works to train ChatGPT.[124][125]

Copyright of AI-generated content
A separate question is whether AI-generated works can qualify for copyright protection. The United States Copyright Office has ruled that works created by artificial intelligence without any human input cannot be copyrighted, because they lack human authorship.[126] Some legal professionals have suggested that Naruto v. Slater (2018), in which the U.S. 9th Circuit Court of Appeals held that non-humans cannot be copyright holders of artistic works, could be a potential precedent in copyright litigation over works created by generative AI.[127] However, the office has also begun taking public input to determine if these rules need to be refined for generative AI.[128]

In January 2025, the United States Copyright Office (USCO) released extensive guidance regarding the use of AI tools in the creative process, and established that "...generative AI systems also offer tools that similarly allow users to exert control. [These] can enable the user to control the selection and placement of individual creative elements. Whether such modifications rise to the minimum standard of originality required under Feist will depend on a case-by-case determination. In those cases where they do, the output should be copyrightable"[129] Subsequently, the USCO registered the first visual artwork to be composed of entirely AI-generated materials, titled "A Single Piece of American Cheese".[130]

Concerns
See also: Ethics of artificial intelligence
The development of generative AI has raised concerns from governments, businesses, and individuals, resulting in protests, legal actions, calls to pause AI experiments, and actions by multiple governments. In a July 2023 briefing of the United Nations Security Council, Secretary-General António Guterres stated "Generative AI has enormous potential for good and evil at scale", that AI may "turbocharge global development" and contribute between $10 and $15 trillion to the global economy by 2030, but that its malicious use "could cause horrific levels of death and destruction, widespread trauma, and deep psychological damage on an unimaginable scale".[131] In addition, generative AI has a significant carbon footprint.[132][133]

Job losses
Main articles: Workplace impact of artificial intelligence and Technological unemployment

A picketer at the 2023 Writers Guild of America strike. While not a top priority, one of the WGA's 2023 requests was "regulations around the use of (generative) AI".[134]
From the early days of the development of AI, there have been arguments put forward by ELIZA creator Joseph Weizenbaum and others about whether tasks that can be done by computers actually should be done by them, given the difference between computers and humans, and between quantitative calculations and qualitative, value-based judgements.[135] In April 2023, it was reported that image generation AI has resulted in 70% of the jobs for video game illustrators in China being lost.[136][137] In July 2023, developments in generative AI contributed to the 2023 Hollywood labor disputes. Fran Drescher, president of the Screen Actors Guild, declared that "artificial intelligence poses an existential threat to creative professions" during the 2023 SAG-AFTRA strike.[138] Voice generation AI has been seen as a potential challenge to the voice acting sector.[139][140]

The intersection of AI and employment concerns among underrepresented groups globally remains a critical facet. While AI promises efficiency enhancements and skill acquisition, concerns about job displacement and biased recruiting processes persist among these groups, as outlined in surveys by Fast Company. To leverage AI for a more equitable society, proactive steps encompass mitigating biases, advocating transparency, respecting privacy and consent, and embracing diverse teams and ethical considerations. Strategies involve redirecting policy emphasis on regulation, inclusive design, and education's potential for personalized teaching to maximize benefits while minimizing harms.[141]

Racial and gender bias
Generative AI models can reflect and amplify any cultural bias present in the underlying data. For example, a language model might assume that doctors and judges are male, and that secretaries or nurses are female, if those biases are common in the training data.[142] Similarly, an image model prompted with the text "a photo of a CEO" might disproportionately generate images of white male CEOs,[143] if trained on a racially biased data set. A number of methods for mitigating bias have been attempted, such as altering input prompts[144] and reweighting training data.[145]

Deepfakes
Main article: Deepfake
Deepfakes (a portmanteau of "deep learning" and "fake"[146]) are AI-generated media that take a person in an existing image or video and replace them with someone else's likeness using artificial neural networks.[147] Deepfakes have garnered widespread attention and concerns for their uses in deepfake celebrity pornographic videos, revenge porn, fake news, hoaxes, health disinformation, financial fraud, and covert foreign election interference.[148][149][150][151][152][153][154] This has elicited responses from both industry and government to detect and limit their use.[155][156]

In July 2023, the fact-checking company Logically found that the popular generative AI models Midjourney, DALL-E 2 and Stable Diffusion would produce plausible disinformation images when prompted to do so, such as images of electoral fraud in the United States and Muslim women supporting India's Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party.[157][158]

In April 2024, a paper proposed to use blockchain (distributed ledger technology) to promote "transparency, verifiability, and decentralization in AI development and usage".[159]

Audio deepfakes
Main article: Audio deepfake
Instances of users abusing software to generate controversial statements in the vocal style of celebrities, public officials, and other famous individuals have raised ethical concerns over voice generation AI.[160][161][162][163][164][165] In response, companies such as ElevenLabs have stated that they would work on mitigating potential abuse through safeguards and identity verification.[166]

Concerns and fandoms have spawned from AI-generated music. The same software used to clone voices has been used on famous musicians' voices to create songs that mimic their voices, gaining both tremendous popularity and criticism.[167][168][169] Similar techniques have also been used to create improved quality or full-length versions of songs that have been leaked or have yet to be released.[170]

Generative AI has also been used to create new digital artist personalities, with some of these receiving enough attention to receive record deals at major labels.[171] The developers of these virtual artists have also faced their fair share of criticism for their personified programs, including backlash for "dehumanizing" an artform, and also creating artists which create unrealistic or immoral appeals to their audiences.[172]

Illegal imagery
Main article: Child pornography § Artificially generated or simulated imagery
Many websites that allow explicit AI generated images or videos have been created,[173] and this has been used to create illegal content, such as rape, child sexual abuse material,[174][175] necrophilia, and zoophilia.

Cybercrime
Generative AI's ability to create realistic fake content has been exploited in numerous types of cybercrime, including phishing scams.[176] Deepfake video and audio have been used to create disinformation and fraud. In 2020, former Google click fraud czar Shuman Ghosemajumder argued that once deepfake videos become perfectly realistic, they would stop appearing remarkable to viewers, potentially leading to uncritical acceptance of false information.[177] Additionally, large language models and other forms of text-generation AI have been used to create fake reviews of e-commerce websites to boost ratings.[178] Cybercriminals have created large language models focused on fraud, including WormGPT and FraudGPT.[179]

A 2023 study showed that generative AI can be vulnerable to jailbreaks, reverse psychology and prompt injection attacks, enabling attackers to obtain help with harmful requests, such as for crafting social engineering and phishing attacks.[180] Additionally, other researchers have demonstrated that open-source models can be fine-tuned to remove their safety restrictions at low cost.[181]

Reliance on industry giants
Training frontier AI models requires an enormous amount of computing power. Usually only Big Tech companies have the financial resources to make such investments. Smaller start-ups such as Cohere and OpenAI end up buying access to data centers from Google and Microsoft respectively.[182]

Energy and environment
Main article: Environmental impacts of artificial intelligence
AI has a significant carbon footprint due to growing energy consumption from both training and usage.[132][133] Scientists and journalists have expressed concerns about the environmental impact that the development and deployment of generative models are having: high CO2 emissions,[183][184][185] large amounts of freshwater used for data centers,[186][187] and high amounts of electricity usage.[184][188][189] There is also concern that these impacts may increase as these models are incorporated into widely used search engines such as Google Search and Bing,[188] as chatbots and other applications become more popular,[187][188] and as models need to be retrained.[188]

The carbon footprint of generative AI globally is estimated to be growing steadily, with potential annual emissions ranging from 18.21 to 245.94 million tons of CO2 by 2035,[190] with the highest estimates for 2035 nearing the impact of the United States beef industry on emissions (currently estimated to emit 257.5 million tons annually as of 2024).[191]

Proposed mitigation strategies include factoring potential environmental costs prior to model development or data collection,[183] increasing efficiency of data centers to reduce electricity/energy usage,[185][188][189] building more efficient machine learning models,[184][186][187] minimizing the number of times that models need to be retrained,[185] developing a government-directed framework for auditing the environmental impact of these models,[185][186] regulating for transparency of these models,[185] regulating their energy and water usage,[186] encouraging researchers to publish data on their models' carbon footprint,[185][188] and increasing the number of subject matter experts who understand both machine learning and climate science.[185]

Content quality
See also: AI slop and Dead Internet theory
The New York Times defines slop as analogous to spam: "shoddy or unwanted A.I. content in social media, art, books and ... in search results."[192] Journalists have expressed concerns about the scale of low-quality generated content with respect to social media content moderation,[193] the monetary incentives from social media companies to spread such content,[193][194] false political messaging,[194] spamming of scientific research paper submissions,[195] increased time and effort to find higher quality or desired content on the Internet,[196] the indexing of generated content by search engines,[197] and on journalism itself.[198]

A paper published by researchers at Amazon Web Services AI Labs found that over 57% of sentences from a sample of over 6 billion sentences from Common Crawl, a snapshot of web pages, were machine translated. Many of these automated translations were seen as lower quality, especially for sentences that were translated across at least three languages. Many lower-resource languages (ex. Wolof, Xhosa) were translated across more languages than higher-resource languages (ex. English, French).[199][200]

In September 2024, Robyn Speer, the author of wordfreq, an open source database that calculated word frequencies based on text from the Internet, announced that she had stopped updating the data for several reasons: high costs for obtaining data from Reddit and Twitter, excessive focus on generative AI compared to other methods in the natural language processing community, and that "generative AI has polluted the data".[201]

The adoption of generative AI tools led to an explosion of AI-generated content across multiple domains. A study from University College London estimated that in 2023, more than 60,000 scholarly articles—over 1% of all publications—were likely written with LLM assistance.[202] According to Stanford University's Institute for Human-Centered AI, approximately 17.5% of newly published computer science papers and 16.9% of peer review text now incorporate content generated by LLMs.[203] Many academic disciplines have concerns about the factual reliably of academic content generated by AI.[204]

Visual content follows a similar trend. Since the launch of DALL-E 2 in 2022, it is estimated that an average of 34 million images have been created daily. As of August 2023, more than 15 billion images had been generated using text-to-image algorithms, with 80% of these created by models based on Stable Diffusion.[205]

If AI-generated content is included in new data crawls from the Internet for additional training of AI models, defects in the resulting models may occur.[206] Training an AI model exclusively on the output of another AI model produces a lower-quality model. Repeating this process, where each new model is trained on the previous model's output, leads to progressive degradation and eventually results in a "model collapse" after multiple iterations.[207] Tests have been conducted with pattern recognition of handwritten letters and with pictures of human faces.[208] As a consequence, the value of data collected from genuine human interactions with systems may become increasingly valuable in the presence of LLM-generated content in data crawled from the Internet.

On the other side, synthetic data is often used as an alternative to data produced by real-world events. Such data can be deployed to validate mathematical models and to train machine learning models while preserving user privacy,[209] including for structured data.[210] The approach is not limited to text generation; image generation has been employed to train computer vision models.[211]

Misuse in journalism
See also: Automated journalism and List of fake news websites § Generative AI
Generative AI's potential to generate a large amount of content with little effort is also affecting journalism.[212] In January 2023, Futurism.com broke the story that CNET had been using an undisclosed internal AI tool to write at least 77 of its stories; after the news broke, CNET posted corrections to 41 of the stories.[213] In April 2023, Die Aktuelle published a AI-generated fake interview of Michael Schumacher.[214] In May 2024, Futurism noted that a content management system video by AdVon Commerce, who had used generative AI to produce articles for many of the aforementioned outlets, appeared to show that they "had produced tens of thousands of articles for more than 150 publishers."[215] In 2025, a report from the American Sunlight Project stated that Pravda network was publishing as many as 10,000 articles a day, and concluded that much of this content aimed to push Russian narratives into large language models through their training data.[216]

In June 2024, Reuters Institute published their Digital News Report for 2024. In a survey of people in America and Europe, Reuters Institute reports that 52% and 47% respectively are uncomfortable with news produced by "mostly AI with some human oversight", and 23% and 15% respectively report being comfortable. 42% of Americans and 33% of Europeans reported that they were comfortable with news produced by "mainly human with some help from AI". The results of global surveys reported that people were more uncomfortable with news topics including politics (46%), crime (43%), and local news (37%) produced by AI than other news topics.[217]

See also
icon	Computer programming portal
icon	Technology portal
Artificial general intelligence – Type of AI with wide-ranging abilities
Artificial imagination – Artificial simulation of human imagination
Artificial intelligence art – Visual media created with AI
Artificial life – Field of study
Chatbot – Program that simulates conversation
Computational creativity – Multidisciplinary endeavour
Generative adversarial network – Deep learning method
Generative pre-trained transformer – Type of large language model
Large language model – Type of machine learning model
Music and artificial intelligence – Usage of artificial intelligence to generate music
Generative AI pornography – Explicit material produced by generative AI
Procedural generation – Method in which data is created algorithmically as opposed to manually
Retrieval-augmented generation – Type of information retrieval using LLMs
Stochastic parrot – Term used in machine learning

The ushabti (also called shabti or shawabti, with a number of variant spellings) was a ancient Egyptian funerary figurine. The Egyptological term is derived from 𓅱𓈙𓃀𓏏𓏭𓀾 wšbtj, which replaced earlier 𓆷𓍯𓃀𓏏𓏭𓀾 šwbtj, perhaps the nisba of 𓈙𓍯𓃀𓆭 šwꜣb "Persea tree".

Ushabtis were placed in tombs among the grave goods and were intended to act as servants or minions for the deceased, should they be called upon to do manual labor in the afterlife. The figurines frequently carried a hoe on their shoulder and a basket on their backs, implying they were intended to farm for the deceased. They were usually written on by the use of hieroglyphs typically found on the legs.[1][2] They carried inscriptions asserting their readiness to answer the gods' summons to work.[3]

The practice of using ushabtis originated in the Old Kingdom of Egypt (c. 2600 to 2100 BC), with the use of life-sized reserve heads made from limestone, which were buried with the mummy.[4] Most ushabtis were of minor size, and many produced in multiples – they sometimes covered the floor around a sarcophagus. Exceptional ushabtis are of larger size, or produced as a one-of-a-kind master work.

Due to the ushabti's commonness through all Egyptian time periods, and world museums' desire to represent ancient Egyptian art objects, the ushabti is one of the most commonly represented objects in Egyptology displays. Produced in huge numbers, ushabtis, along with scarabs, are the most numerous of all ancient Egyptian antiquities to survive.


Collection of Ushabti Figurines, Albert Hall Museum, Jaipur
Etymology and usage of the terms
The term shabti applies to these figures prior to the Twenty-first Dynasty of Egypt, but only after the end of the First Intermediate Period (c. 2181–2055 BCE), and really only to those figurines inscribed with Chapter Six of the Book of the Dead. Otherwise, they might better be defined by the generic term "funerary figurines".

Shabtis were servant figures that carried out the tasks required of the deceased in the underworld. It was necessary for the owner's name to be inscribed on an ushabti, along with a phrase sending them to action, written in the hieratic script.[4]

The shawabti were a distinct class of funerary figurines within the area of Thebes during the New Kingdom.

The term ushabti became prevalent after the 21st Dynasty and remained in use until the Ptolemaic Kingdom.

It is thought by some that the term ushabti meant "follower" or "answerer" in Ancient Egyptian, because the figurine "answered" for the deceased person and performed all the routine chores of daily life for its master in the afterlife that the gods had planned for them,[5] although it would be difficult to reconcile this derivation with the form shawabti.[6]

Examples of ushabtis from different dynasties
Early ushabti made from wax (11th Dynasty)
Early ushabti made from wax (11th Dynasty)
Ushabti of Amenemhat (18th Dynasty)
Ushabti of Amenemhat (18th Dynasty)
Ushabti of pharaoh Ramesses IV (20th Dynasty)
Ushabti of pharaoh Ramesses IV (20th Dynasty)
Ushabti of Nesitanebetashru, daughter of Pinedjem II (end-21st Dynasty)
Ushabti of Nesitanebetashru, daughter of Pinedjem II (end-21st Dynasty)
Ushabti of pharaoh Taharqa (25th Dynasty)
Ushabti of pharaoh Taharqa (25th Dynasty)
Ushabti of a priest (30th Dynasty)
Ushabti of a priest (30th Dynasty)
Inscriptions

Ushabti box at the Rosicrucian Egyptian Museum
Ushabti inscriptions often contain the 6th chapter of the Book of the Dead, translated as:

Illumine the Osiris [name of the deceased], whose word is truth. Hail, Shabti Figure! If the Osiris [name of the deceased] be decreed to do any of the work which is to be done in Khert-Neter, let everything which standeth in the way be removed from him – whether it be to plough the fields, or to fill the channels with water, or to carry sand from the East to the West. The Shabti Figure replieth: "I will do it, verily I am here when thou callest".[7]

(Example: the deceased Ramses would have been described as "Osiris Ramses").

In rare cases different chapters of the Book of the Dead are written. Furthermore, ushabtis often mention the name and the titles of the owner, without the spells of the Book of the Dead.

Before being inscribed on funerary figurines, the spell was written on some mid-Twelfth Dynasty coffins from Deir el-Bersha (about 1850 BC) and is known today as spell 472 of the Coffin Texts.[8]

Usage

Ushabti with linen grave clothes. 19th Dynasty, Heracleopolis Magna
Mentioned first in spell 472 of the Coffin Texts, they were included in the grave goods of the dead as small figurines since the reign of Mentuhotep II of the 11th Dynasty.[9] Some think that originally they may have symbolically replaced human sacrificial burials, called retainer sacrifices, a somewhat improbable theory as centuries had passed between the last known sacrificial burials and the appearance of the ushabtis.[citation needed] They were generally distinguished from other statuettes by being inscribed with the name of the deceased, his titles, and often with spell 472 of the Coffin Texts[5] or the speech of the ushabti figure found in Chapter Six of the Book of the Dead.

In the 18th Dynasty during the reign of Akhenaten, the figurines were inscribed with an offering addressed to the sun disk Aten, rather than the traditional speech of the ushabti figure. The ushabti was believed to magically animate after the dead had been judged, and work for the dead person as a substitute labourer in the fields of Osiris. From the New Kingdom onwards, it was often referred to as servant.

From the 21st Dynasty on, ushabtis became common and numerous in graves. In some tombs the floor was covered with a great many ushabti figurines; in others the ushabtis were neatly packed into ushabti boxes. At times, several hundred ushabti were placed in a deceased Ancient Egyptian's tomb, but pharaohs had considerably more of these servants than commoners, and king Taharqa had more than a thousand.[10] Some tombs contained overseer or 'reis' ushabtis holding a whip, which were responsible for groups of ten ushabti each (ten being a common administrative division, for example in the armies). These overseers became rare during the Late Period.

The tomb of Tutankhamun had a large number of ushabtis of varying sizes, and most were ornate, with hieroglyph statements.[11] They were divided into groups: some honored Osiriform gods, gold-foiled; some were more simple of wood, or faience.

A receipt for 401 ushabtis produced by Padikhonsu
A receipt for 401 ushabtis produced by Padikhonsu
 
Funerary Ushabti, Albert Hall Museum
Funerary Ushabti, Albert Hall Museum
Shape and material
Ushabtis were mostly mummiform, but during the Dynasty XVIII reign of Thutmose IV, they began to be fashioned as servants with baskets, sacks, and other agricultural tools. Some ushabtis were very ornate in form, and in colour, when made of enamel.[12] They were also made of clay, wood and stone[5] and early ones were sometimes made from wax. Later figurines were often made of less perishable materials: stone, terracotta, metal, glass and, most frequently, glazed earthenware (Egyptian faience). While ushabtis manufactured for the rich were often miniature works of art, the great mass of cheaply made ushabtis became standardised—made from single molds with little detail. The level of standardisation varied, a compositional and morphological study of faience ushabtis suggested that mass-production is an oversimplification of a complex process that may more accurately be described as batch-processing.[13]

See also
Dogū
Haniwa
Shikigami
Stick shabti
Terracotta Army
Totem
Wooden tomb model

In machine learning, embedding is a representation learning technique that maps complex, high-dimensional data into a lower-dimensional vector space of numerical vectors.[1]

Technique
It also denotes the resulting representation, where meaningful patterns or relationships are preserved. As a technique, it learns these vectors from data like words, images, or user interactions, differing from manually designed methods such as one-hot encoding.[2] This process reduces complexity and captures key features without needing prior knowledge of the domain.

Similarity
In natural language processing, words or concepts may be represented as feature vectors, where similar concepts are mapped to nearby vectors. The resulting embeddings vary by type, including word embeddings for text (e.g., Word2Vec), image embeddings for visual data, and knowledge graph embeddings for knowledge graphs, each tailored to tasks like NLP, computer vision, or recommendation systems.[3] This dual role enhances model efficiency and accuracy by automating feature extraction and revealing latent similarities across diverse applications.

To measure the distance between two embeddings, a similarity measure can be used to find the overall similarity of the concepts represented by the embeddings. If the vectors are normalized to have a magnitude of 1, then the similarity measures are proportional to 
cos
⁡
(
θ
a
b
)
{\displaystyle \cos \left(\theta _{ab}\right)}.[4]

Similarity Measures
Name	Meaning	Formula	Formula (Scalar)	Similarity Correlation
Euclidean Distance	Distance between ends of vectors	
|
a
−
b
|
{\displaystyle |a-b|}	
∑
(
a
n
−
b
n
)
2
{\displaystyle {\sqrt {\sum \left(a_{n}-b_{n}\right)^{2}}}}	Negative Correlation
Cosine Similarity	Cosine of angle 
θ
{\displaystyle \theta } between vectors	
a
⋅
b
|
a
|
|
b
|
{\displaystyle {\frac {a\cdot b}{|a||b|}}}	
∑
a
n
b
n
(
∑
a
n
2
)
(
∑
b
n
2
)
{\displaystyle {\frac {\sum a_{n}b_{n}}{\sqrt {\left(\sum a_{n}^{2}\right)\left(\sum b_{n}^{2}\right)}}}}	Positive Correlation
Dot Product	Cosine similarity multiplied by the lengths of both vectors	
a
⋅
b
{\displaystyle a\cdot b}	
∑
a
n
b
n
{\displaystyle \sum a_{n}b_{n}}	Positive Correlation
The cosine similarity disregards the magnitude of the vector when determining similarity, so it is less biased towards training data that appears very frequently. The dot product includes the magnitude inherently, so it will tend to value more popular data.[4] Generally, for high-dimensional vector spaces, vectors tend to converge in distance, so Euclidean distance becomes less reliable for large embedding vectors.[5]

Machine learning (ML) is a field of study in artificial intelligence concerned with the development and study of statistical algorithms that can learn from data and generalize to unseen data, and thus perform tasks without explicit programming language instructions.[1] Within a subdiscipline of machine learning, advances in the field of deep learning have allowed neural networks, a class of statistical algorithms, to surpass many previous machine learning approaches in performance.

Statistics and mathematical optimisation (mathematical programming) methods compose the foundations of machine learning. Data mining is a related field of study, focusing on exploratory data analysis (EDA) through unsupervised learning.[3][4]

From a theoretical viewpoint, probably approximately correct learning provides a mathematical and statistical framework for describing machine learning. Most traditional machine learning and deep learning algorithms can be described as empirical risk minimisation under this framework.

History
See also: Timeline of machine learning
The term machine learning was coined in 1959 by Arthur Samuel, an IBM employee and pioneer in the field of computer gaming and artificial intelligence.[5][6] The synonym self-teaching computers was also used during this time period.[7][8]

The earliest machine learning program was introduced in the 1950s when Arthur Samuel invented a computer program that calculated the winning chance in checkers for each side, but the history of machine learning roots back to decades of human desire and effort to study human cognitive processes.[9] In 1949, Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb published the book The Organization of Behavior, in which he introduced a theoretical neural structure formed by certain interactions among nerve cells.[10] Hebb's model of neurons interacting with one another set a groundwork for how AIs and machine learning algorithms work under nodes, or artificial neurons used by computers to communicate data.[9] Other researchers who have studied human cognitive systems contributed to the modern machine learning technologies as well, including logician Walter Pitts and Warren McCulloch, who proposed the early mathematical models of neural networks to come up with algorithms that mirror human thought processes.[9]

By the early 1960s, an experimental "learning machine" with punched tape memory, called Cybertron, had been developed by Raytheon Company to analyse sonar signals, electrocardiograms, and speech patterns using rudimentary reinforcement learning. It was repetitively "trained" by a human operator/teacher to recognise patterns and equipped with a "goof" button to cause it to reevaluate incorrect decisions.[11] A representative book on research into machine learning during the 1960s was Nils Nilsson's book on Learning Machines, dealing mostly with machine learning for pattern classification.[12] Interest related to pattern recognition continued into the 1970s, as described by Duda and Hart in 1973.[13] In 1981, a report was given on using teaching strategies so that an artificial neural network learns to recognise 40 characters (26 letters, 10 digits, and 4 special symbols) from a computer terminal.[14]

Tom M. Mitchell provided a widely quoted, more formal definition of the algorithms studied in the machine learning field: "A computer program is said to learn from experience E with respect to some class of tasks T and performance measure P if its performance at tasks in T, as measured by P, improves with experience E."[15] This definition of the tasks in which machine learning is concerned offers a fundamentally operational definition rather than defining the field in cognitive terms. This follows Alan Turing's proposal in his paper "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", in which the question, "Can machines think?", is replaced with the question, "Can machines do what we (as thinking entities) can do?".[16]

Modern-day Machine Learning algorithms are broken into 3 algorithm types: Supervised Learning Algorithms, Unsupervised Learning Algorithms, and Reinforcement Learning Algorithms.[17]

Current Supervised Learning Algorithms have objectives of classification and regression.
Current Unsupervised Learning Algorithms have objectives of clustering, dimensionality reduction, and association rule.
Current Reinforcement Learning Algorithms focus on decisions that must be made with respect to some previous, unknown time and are broken down to either be studies of model-based methods or model-free methods.
In 2014 Ian Goodfellow and others introduced generative adversarial networks (GANs) with realistic data synthesis.[18] By 2016 AlphaGo obtained victory against top human players using reinforcement learning techniques.[19]

Relationships to other fields
Artificial intelligence

Deep learning is a subset of machine learning, which is itself a subset of artificial intelligence.[20]
As a scientific endeavour, machine learning grew out of the quest for artificial intelligence (AI). In the early days of AI as an academic discipline, some researchers were interested in having machines learn from data. They attempted to approach the problem with various symbolic methods, as well as what were then termed "neural networks"; these were mostly perceptrons and other models that were later found to be reinventions of the generalised linear models of statistics.[21] Probabilistic reasoning was also employed, especially in automated medical diagnosis.[22]: 488 

However, an increasing emphasis on the logical, knowledge-based approach caused a rift between AI and machine learning. Probabilistic systems were plagued by theoretical and practical problems of data acquisition and representation.[22]: 488  By 1980, expert systems had come to dominate AI, and statistics was out of favour.[23] Work on symbolic/knowledge-based learning did continue within AI, leading to inductive logic programming(ILP), but the more statistical line of research was now outside the field of AI proper, in pattern recognition and information retrieval.[22]: 708–710, 755  Neural networks research had been abandoned by AI and computer science around the same time. This line, too, was continued outside the AI/CS field, as "connectionism", by researchers from other disciplines, including John Hopfield, David Rumelhart, and Geoffrey Hinton. Their main success came in the mid-1980s with the reinvention of backpropagation.[22]: 25 

Machine learning (ML), reorganised and recognised as its own field, started to flourish in the 1990s. The field changed its goal from achieving artificial intelligence to tackling solvable problems of a practical nature. It shifted focus away from the symbolic approaches it had inherited from AI, and toward methods and models borrowed from statistics, fuzzy logic, and probability theory.[23]

Data compression
This section is an excerpt from Data compression § Machine learning.[edit]
There is a close connection between machine learning and compression. A system that predicts the posterior probabilities of a sequence given its entire history can be used for optimal data compression (by using arithmetic coding on the output distribution). Conversely, an optimal compressor can be used for prediction (by finding the symbol that compresses best, given the previous history). This equivalence has been used as a justification for using data compression as a benchmark for "general intelligence".[24][25][26]

An alternative view can show compression algorithms implicitly map strings into implicit feature space vectors, and compression-based similarity measures compute similarity within these feature spaces. For each compressor C(.) we define an associated vector space ℵ, such that C(.) maps an input string x, corresponding to the vector norm ||~x||. An exhaustive examination of the feature spaces underlying all compression algorithms is precluded by space; instead, feature vectors chooses to examine three representative lossless compression methods, LZW, LZ77, and PPM.[27]

According to AIXI theory, a connection more directly explained in Hutter Prize, the best possible compression of x is the smallest possible software that generates x. For example, in that model, a zip file's compressed size includes both the zip file and the unzipping software, since you can not unzip it without both, but there may be an even smaller combined form.

Examples of AI-powered audio/video compression software include NVIDIA Maxine, AIVC.[28] Examples of software that can perform AI-powered image compression include OpenCV, TensorFlow, MATLAB's Image Processing Toolbox (IPT) and High-Fidelity Generative Image Compression.[29]

In unsupervised machine learning, k-means clustering can be utilized to compress data by grouping similar data points into clusters. This technique simplifies handling extensive datasets that lack predefined labels and finds widespread use in fields such as image compression.[30]

Data compression aims to reduce the size of data files, enhancing storage efficiency and speeding up data transmission. K-means clustering, an unsupervised machine learning algorithm, is employed to partition a dataset into a specified number of clusters, k, each represented by the centroid of its points. This process condenses extensive datasets into a more compact set of representative points. Particularly beneficial in image and signal processing, k-means clustering aids in data reduction by replacing groups of data points with their centroids, thereby preserving the core information of the original data while significantly decreasing the required storage space.[31]

Large language models (LLMs) are also efficient lossless data compressors on some data sets, as demonstrated by DeepMind's research with the Chinchilla 70B model. Developed by DeepMind, Chinchilla 70B effectively compressed data, outperforming conventional methods such as Portable Network Graphics (PNG) for images and Free Lossless Audio Codec (FLAC) for audio. It achieved compression of image and audio data to 43.4% and 16.4% of their original sizes, respectively. There is, however, some reason to be concerned that the data set used for testing overlaps the LLM training data set, making it possible that the Chinchilla 70B model is only an efficient compression tool on data it has already been trained on.[32][33]

Data mining
Machine learning and data mining often employ the same methods and overlap significantly, but while machine learning focuses on prediction, based on known properties learned from the training data, data mining focuses on the discovery of (previously) unknown properties in the data (this is the analysis step of knowledge discovery in databases). Data mining uses many machine learning methods, but with different goals; on the other hand, machine learning also employs data mining methods as "unsupervised learning" or as a preprocessing step to improve learner accuracy. Much of the confusion between these two research communities (which do often have separate conferences and separate journals, ECML PKDD being a major exception) comes from the basic assumptions they work with: in machine learning, performance is usually evaluated with respect to the ability to reproduce known knowledge, while in knowledge discovery and data mining (KDD) the key task is the discovery of previously unknown knowledge. Evaluated with respect to known knowledge, an uninformed (unsupervised) method will easily be outperformed by other supervised methods, while in a typical KDD task, supervised methods cannot be used due to the unavailability of training data.[citation needed]

Machine learning also has intimate ties to optimisation: Many learning problems are formulated as minimisation of some loss function on a training set of examples. Loss functions express the discrepancy between the predictions of the model being trained and the actual problem instances (for example, in classification, one wants to assign a label to instances, and models are trained to correctly predict the preassigned labels of a set of examples).[34]

Generalization
Characterizing the generalisation of various learning algorithms is an active topic of current research, especially for deep learning algorithms.[citation needed]

Statistics
Machine learning and statistics are closely related fields in terms of methods, but distinct in their principal goal: statistics draws population inferences from a sample, while machine learning finds generalisable predictive patterns.[35]

Conventional statistical analyses require the a priori selection of a model most suitable for the study data set. In addition, only significant or theoretically relevant variables based on previous experience are included for analysis. In contrast, machine learning is not built on a pre-structured model; rather, the data shape the model by detecting underlying patterns. The more variables (input) used to train the model, the more accurate the ultimate model will be.[36]

Leo Breiman distinguished two statistical modelling paradigms: data model and algorithmic model,[37] wherein "algorithmic model" means more or less the machine learning algorithms like Random Forest.[clarification needed]

Some statisticians have adopted methods from machine learning, leading to a combined field that they call statistical learning.[38]

Statistical physics
Analytical and computational techniques derived from deep-rooted physics of disordered systems can be extended to large-scale problems, including machine learning, e.g., to analyse the weight space of deep neural networks.[39] Statistical physics is thus finding applications in the area of medical diagnostics.[40]

Theory
Main articles: Computational learning theory and Statistical learning theory
A core objective of a learner is to generalise from its experience.[2][41] Generalisation in this context is the ability of a learning machine to perform accurately on new, unseen examples/tasks after having experienced a learning data set. The training examples come from some generally unknown probability distribution (considered representative of the space of occurrences) and the learner has to build a general model about this space that enables it to produce sufficiently accurate predictions in new cases.

The computational analysis of machine learning algorithms and their performance is a branch of theoretical computer science known as computational learning theory via the probably approximately correct learning model. Because training sets are finite and the future is uncertain, learning theory usually does not yield guarantees of the performance of algorithms. Instead, probabilistic bounds on the performance are quite common. The bias–variance decomposition is one way to quantify generalisation error.

For the best performance in the context of generalisation, the complexity of the hypothesis should match the complexity of the function underlying the data. If the hypothesis is less complex than the function, then the model has underfitted the data. If the complexity of the model is increased in response, then the training error decreases. But if the hypothesis is too complex, then the model is subject to overfitting and generalisation will be poorer.[42]

In addition to performance bounds, learning theorists study the time complexity and feasibility of learning. In computational learning theory, a computation is considered feasible if it can be done in polynomial time. There are two kinds of time complexity results: Positive results show that a certain class of functions can be learned in polynomial time. Negative results show that certain classes cannot be learned in polynomial time.[citation needed]

Approaches


In supervised learning, the training data is labelled with the expected answers, while in unsupervised learning, the model identifies patterns or structures in unlabelled data.
Machine learning approaches are traditionally divided into three broad categories, which correspond to learning paradigms, depending on the nature of the "signal" or "feedback" available to the learning system:

Supervised learning: The computer is presented with example inputs and their desired outputs, given by a "teacher", and the goal is to learn a general rule that maps inputs to outputs.
Unsupervised learning: No labels are given to the learning algorithm, leaving it on its own to find structure in its input. Unsupervised learning can be a goal in itself (discovering hidden patterns in data) or a means towards an end (feature learning).
Reinforcement learning: A computer program interacts with a dynamic environment in which it must perform a certain goal (such as driving a vehicle or playing a game against an opponent). As it navigates its problem space, the program is provided feedback that's analogous to rewards, which it tries to maximise.[2]
Although each algorithm has advantages and limitations, no single algorithm works for all problems.[43][44][45]

Supervised learning
Main article: Supervised learning

A support-vector machine is a supervised learning model that divides the data into regions separated by a linear boundary. Here, the linear boundary divides the black circles from the white.
Supervised learning algorithms build a mathematical model of a set of data that contains both the inputs and the desired outputs.[46] The data, known as training data, consists of a set of training examples. Each training example has one or more inputs and the desired output, also known as a supervisory signal. In the mathematical model, each training example is represented by an array or vector, sometimes called a feature vector, and the training data is represented by a matrix. Through iterative optimisation of an objective function, supervised learning algorithms learn a function that can be used to predict the output associated with new inputs.[47] An optimal function allows the algorithm to correctly determine the output for inputs that were not a part of the training data. An algorithm that improves the accuracy of its outputs or predictions over time is said to have learned to perform that task.[15]

Types of supervised-learning algorithms include active learning, classification and regression.[48] Classification algorithms are used when the outputs are restricted to a limited set of values, while regression algorithms are used when the outputs can take any numerical value within a range. For example, in a classification algorithm that filters emails, the input is an incoming email, and the output is the folder in which to file the email. In contrast, regression is used for tasks such as predicting a person's height based on factors like age and genetics or forecasting future temperatures based on historical data.[49]

Similarity learning is an area of supervised machine learning closely related to regression and classification, but the goal is to learn from examples using a similarity function that measures how similar or related two objects are. It has applications in ranking, recommendation systems, visual identity tracking, face verification, and speaker verification.

Unsupervised learning
Main article: Unsupervised learning
See also: Cluster analysis
Unsupervised learning algorithms find structures in data that has not been labelled, classified or categorised. Instead of responding to feedback, unsupervised learning algorithms identify commonalities in the data and react based on the presence or absence of such commonalities in each new piece of data. Central applications of unsupervised machine learning include clustering, dimensionality reduction,[4] and density estimation.[50]

Cluster analysis is the assignment of a set of observations into subsets (called clusters) so that observations within the same cluster are similar according to one or more predesignated criteria, while observations drawn from different clusters are dissimilar. Different clustering techniques make different assumptions on the structure of the data, often defined by some similarity metric and evaluated, for example, by internal compactness, or the similarity between members of the same cluster, and separation, the difference between clusters. Other methods are based on estimated density and graph connectivity.

A special type of unsupervised learning called self-supervised learning involves training a model by generating the supervisory signal from the data itself.[51][52]

Dimensionality reduction
Dimensionality reduction is a process of reducing the number of random variables under consideration by obtaining a set of principal variables.[53] In other words, it is a process of reducing the dimension of the feature set, also called the "number of features". Most of the dimensionality reduction techniques can be considered as either feature elimination or extraction. One of the popular methods of dimensionality reduction is principal component analysis (PCA). PCA involves changing higher-dimensional data (e.g., 3D) to a smaller space (e.g., 2D). The manifold hypothesis proposes that high-dimensional data sets lie along low-dimensional manifolds, and many dimensionality reduction techniques make this assumption, leading to the areas of manifold learning and manifold regularisation.

Semi-supervised learning
Main article: Semi-supervised learning
Semi-supervised learning falls between unsupervised learning (without any labelled training data) and supervised learning (with completely labelled training data). Some of the training examples are missing training labels, yet many machine-learning researchers have found that unlabelled data, when used in conjunction with a small amount of labelled data, can produce a considerable improvement in learning accuracy.

In weakly supervised learning, the training labels are noisy, limited, or imprecise; however, these labels are often cheaper to obtain, resulting in larger effective training sets.[54]

Reinforcement learning
Main article: Reinforcement learning

In reinforcement learning, an agent takes actions in an environment: these produce a reward and/or a representation of the state, which is fed back to the agent.
Reinforcement learning is an area of machine learning concerned with how software agents ought to take actions in an environment to maximise some notion of cumulative reward. Due to its generality, the field is studied in many other disciplines, such as game theory, control theory, operations research, information theory, simulation-based optimisation, multi-agent systems, swarm intelligence, statistics and genetic algorithms. In reinforcement learning, the environment is typically represented as a Markov decision process (MDP). Many reinforcement learning algorithms use dynamic programming techniques.[55] Reinforcement learning algorithms do not assume knowledge of an exact mathematical model of the MDP and are used when exact models are infeasible. Reinforcement learning algorithms are used in autonomous vehicles or in learning to play a game against a human opponent.

Other types
Other approaches have been developed which do not fit neatly into this three-fold categorisation, and sometimes more than one is used by the same machine learning system. For example, topic modelling, meta-learning.[56]

Self-learning
Self-learning, as a machine learning paradigm, was introduced in 1982 along with a neural network capable of self-learning, named crossbar adaptive array (CAA).[57][58] It gives a solution to the problem learning without any external reward, by introducing emotion as an internal reward. Emotion is used as a state evaluation of a self-learning agent. The CAA self-learning algorithm computes, in a crossbar fashion, both decisions about actions and emotions (feelings) about consequence situations. The system is driven by the interaction between cognition and emotion.[59] The self-learning algorithm updates a memory matrix W =||w(a,s)|| such that in each iteration executes the following machine learning routine:

in situation s act a
receive a consequence situation s'
compute emotion of being in the consequence situation v(s')
update crossbar memory w'(a,s) = w(a,s) + v(s')
It is a system with only one input, situation, and only one output, action (or behaviour) a. There is neither a separate reinforcement input nor an advice input from the environment. The backpropagated value (secondary reinforcement) is the emotion toward the consequence situation. The CAA exists in two environments, one is the behavioural environment where it behaves, and the other is the genetic environment, wherefrom it initially and only once receives initial emotions about situations to be encountered in the behavioural environment. After receiving the genome (species) vector from the genetic environment, the CAA learns a goal-seeking behaviour in an environment that contains both desirable and undesirable situations.[60]

Feature learning
Main article: Feature learning
Several learning algorithms aim at discovering better representations of the inputs provided during training.[61] Classic examples include principal component analysis and cluster analysis. Feature learning algorithms, also called representation learning algorithms, often attempt to preserve the information in their input but also transform it in a way that makes it useful, often as a pre-processing step before performing classification or predictions. This technique allows reconstruction of the inputs coming from the unknown data-generating distribution, while not being necessarily faithful to configurations that are implausible under that distribution. This replaces manual feature engineering, and allows a machine to both learn the features and use them to perform a specific task.

Feature learning can be either supervised or unsupervised. In supervised feature learning, features are learned using labelled input data. Examples include artificial neural networks, multilayer perceptrons, and supervised dictionary learning. In unsupervised feature learning, features are learned with unlabelled input data. Examples include dictionary learning, independent component analysis, autoencoders, matrix factorisation[62] and various forms of clustering.[63][64][65]

Manifold learning algorithms attempt to do so under the constraint that the learned representation is low-dimensional. Sparse coding algorithms attempt to do so under the constraint that the learned representation is sparse, meaning that the mathematical model has many zeros. Multilinear subspace learning algorithms aim to learn low-dimensional representations directly from tensor representations for multidimensional data, without reshaping them into higher-dimensional vectors.[66] Deep learning algorithms discover multiple levels of representation, or a hierarchy of features, with higher-level, more abstract features defined in terms of (or generating) lower-level features. It has been argued that an intelligent machine learns a representation that disentangles the underlying factors of variation that explain the observed data.[67]

Feature learning is motivated by the fact that machine learning tasks such as classification often require input that is mathematically and computationally convenient to process. However, real-world data such as images, video, and sensory data have not yielded attempts to algorithmically define specific features. An alternative is to discover such features or representations through examination, without relying on explicit algorithms.

Sparse dictionary learning
Main article: Sparse dictionary learning
Sparse dictionary learning is a feature learning method where a training example is represented as a linear combination of basis functions and assumed to be a sparse matrix. The method is strongly NP-hard and difficult to solve approximately.[68] A popular heuristic method for sparse dictionary learning is the k-SVD algorithm. Sparse dictionary learning has been applied in several contexts. In classification, the problem is to determine the class to which a previously unseen training example belongs. For a dictionary where each class has already been built, a new training example is associated with the class that is best sparsely represented by the corresponding dictionary. Sparse dictionary learning has also been applied in image denoising. The key idea is that a clean image patch can be sparsely represented by an image dictionary, but the noise cannot.[69]

Anomaly detection
Main article: Anomaly detection
In data mining, anomaly detection, also known as outlier detection, is the identification of rare items, events or observations that raise suspicions by differing significantly from the majority of the data.[70] Typically, the anomalous items represent an issue such as bank fraud, a structural defect, medical problems or errors in a text. Anomalies are referred to as outliers, novelties, noise, deviations and exceptions.[71]

In particular, in the context of abuse and network intrusion detection, the interesting objects are often not rare, but unexpected bursts of inactivity. This pattern does not adhere to the common statistical definition of an outlier as a rare object. Many outlier detection methods (in particular, unsupervised algorithms) will fail on such data unless aggregated appropriately. Instead, a cluster analysis algorithm may be able to detect the micro-clusters formed by these patterns.[72]

Three broad categories of anomaly detection techniques exist.[73] Unsupervised anomaly detection techniques detect anomalies in an unlabelled test data set under the assumption that the majority of the instances in the data set are normal, by looking for instances that seem to fit the least to the remainder of the data set. Supervised anomaly detection techniques require a data set that has been labelled as "normal" and "abnormal" and involves training a classifier (the key difference from many other statistical classification problems is the inherently unbalanced nature of outlier detection). Semi-supervised anomaly detection techniques construct a model representing normal behaviour from a given normal training data set and then test the likelihood of a test instance being generated by the model.

Robot learning
Robot learning is inspired by a multitude of machine learning methods, starting from supervised learning, reinforcement learning,[74][75] and finally meta-learning (e.g. MAML).

Association rules
Main article: Association rule learning
See also: Inductive logic programming
Association rule learning is a rule-based machine learning method for discovering relationships between variables in large databases. It is intended to identify strong rules discovered in databases using some measure of "interestingness".[76]

Rule-based machine learning is a general term for any machine learning method that identifies, learns, or evolves "rules" to store, manipulate or apply knowledge. The defining characteristic of a rule-based machine learning algorithm is the identification and utilisation of a set of relational rules that collectively represent the knowledge captured by the system. This is in contrast to other machine learning algorithms that commonly identify a singular model that can be universally applied to any instance in order to make a prediction.[77] Rule-based machine learning approaches include learning classifier systems, association rule learning, and artificial immune systems.

Based on the concept of strong rules, Rakesh Agrawal, Tomasz Imieliński and Arun Swami introduced association rules for discovering regularities between products in large-scale transaction data recorded by point-of-sale (POS) systems in supermarkets.[78] For example, the rule 
{
o
n
i
o
n
s
,
p
o
t
a
t
o
e
s
}
⇒
{
b
u
r
g
e
r
}
{\displaystyle \{\mathrm {onions,potatoes} \}\Rightarrow \{\mathrm {burger} \}} found in the sales data of a supermarket would indicate that if a customer buys onions and potatoes together, they are likely to also buy hamburger meat. Such information can be used as the basis for decisions about marketing activities such as promotional pricing or product placements. In addition to market basket analysis, association rules are employed today in application areas including Web usage mining, intrusion detection, continuous production, and bioinformatics. In contrast with sequence mining, association rule learning typically does not consider the order of items either within a transaction or across transactions.

Learning classifier systems (LCS) are a family of rule-based machine learning algorithms that combine a discovery component, typically a genetic algorithm, with a learning component, performing either supervised learning, reinforcement learning, or unsupervised learning. They seek to identify a set of context-dependent rules that collectively store and apply knowledge in a piecewise manner to make predictions.[79]

Inductive logic programming (ILP) is an approach to rule learning using logic programming as a uniform representation for input examples, background knowledge, and hypotheses. Given an encoding of the known background knowledge and a set of examples represented as a logical database of facts, an ILP system will derive a hypothesized logic program that entails all positive and no negative examples. Inductive programming is a related field that considers any kind of programming language for representing hypotheses (and not only logic programming), such as functional programs.

Inductive logic programming is particularly useful in bioinformatics and natural language processing. Gordon Plotkin and Ehud Shapiro laid the initial theoretical foundation for inductive machine learning in a logical setting.[80][81][82] Shapiro built their first implementation (Model Inference System) in 1981: a Prolog program that inductively inferred logic programs from positive and negative examples.[83] The term inductive here refers to philosophical induction, suggesting a theory to explain observed facts, rather than mathematical induction, proving a property for all members of a well-ordered set.

Models
A machine learning model is a type of mathematical model that, once "trained" on a given dataset, can be used to make predictions or classifications on new data. During training, a learning algorithm iteratively adjusts the model's internal parameters to minimise errors in its predictions.[84] By extension, the term "model" can refer to several levels of specificity, from a general class of models and their associated learning algorithms to a fully trained model with all its internal parameters tuned.[85]

Various types of models have been used and researched for machine learning systems, picking the best model for a task is called model selection.

Artificial neural networks
Main article: Artificial neural network
See also: Deep learning

An artificial neural network is an interconnected group of nodes, akin to the vast network of neurons in a brain. Here, each circular node represents an artificial neuron and an arrow represents a connection from the output of one artificial neuron to the input of another.
Artificial neural networks (ANNs), or connectionist systems, are computing systems vaguely inspired by the biological neural networks that constitute animal brains. Such systems "learn" to perform tasks by considering examples, generally without being programmed with any task-specific rules.

An ANN is a model based on a collection of connected units or nodes called "artificial neurons", which loosely model the neurons in a biological brain. Each connection, like the synapses in a biological brain, can transmit information, a "signal", from one artificial neuron to another. An artificial neuron that receives a signal can process it and then signal additional artificial neurons connected to it. In common ANN implementations, the signal at a connection between artificial neurons is a real number, and the output of each artificial neuron is computed by some non-linear function of the sum of its inputs. The connections between artificial neurons are called "edges". Artificial neurons and edges typically have a weight that adjusts as learning proceeds. The weight increases or decreases the strength of the signal at a connection. Artificial neurons may have a threshold such that the signal is only sent if the aggregate signal crosses that threshold. Typically, artificial neurons are aggregated into layers. Different layers may perform different kinds of transformations on their inputs. Signals travel from the first layer (the input layer) to the last layer (the output layer), possibly after traversing the layers multiple times.

The original goal of the ANN approach was to solve problems in the same way that a human brain would. However, over time, attention moved to performing specific tasks, leading to deviations from biology. Artificial neural networks have been used on a variety of tasks, including computer vision, speech recognition, machine translation, social network filtering, playing board and video games and medical diagnosis.

Deep learning consists of multiple hidden layers in an artificial neural network. This approach tries to model the way the human brain processes light and sound into vision and hearing. Some successful applications of deep learning are computer vision and speech recognition.[86]

Decision trees
Main article: Decision tree learning

A decision tree showing survival probability of passengers on the Titanic
Decision tree learning uses a decision tree as a predictive model to go from observations about an item (represented in the branches) to conclusions about the item's target value (represented in the leaves). It is one of the predictive modelling approaches used in statistics, data mining, and machine learning. Tree models where the target variable can take a discrete set of values are called classification trees; in these tree structures, leaves represent class labels, and branches represent conjunctions of features that lead to those class labels. Decision trees where the target variable can take continuous values (typically real numbers) are called regression trees. In decision analysis, a decision tree can be used to visually and explicitly represent decisions and decision making. In data mining, a decision tree describes data, but the resulting classification tree can be an input for decision-making.

Random forest regression
Random forest regression (RFR) falls under the umbrella of decision tree-based models. RFR is an ensemble learning method that builds multiple decision trees and averages their predictions to improve accuracy and to avoid overfitting. To build decision trees, RFR uses bootstrapped sampling; for instance, each decision tree is trained on random data from the training set. This random selection of RFR for training enables the model to reduce biased predictions and achieve a higher degree of accuracy. RFR generates independent decision trees, and it can work on single-output data as well as multiple regressor tasks. This makes RFR compatible to be use in various applications.[87][88]

Support-vector machines
Main article: Support-vector machine
Support-vector machines (SVMs), also known as support-vector networks, are a set of related supervised learning methods used for classification and regression. Given a set of training examples, each marked as belonging to one of two categories, an SVM training algorithm builds a model that predicts whether a new example falls into one category.[89] An SVM training algorithm is a non-probabilistic, binary, linear classifier, although methods such as Platt scaling exist to use SVM in a probabilistic classification setting. In addition to performing linear classification, SVMs can efficiently perform a non-linear classification using what is called the kernel trick, implicitly mapping their inputs into high-dimensional feature spaces.

Regression analysis
Main article: Regression analysis

Illustration of linear regression on a data set
Regression analysis encompasses a large variety of statistical methods to estimate the relationship between input variables and their associated features. Its most common form is linear regression, where a single line is drawn to best fit the given data according to a mathematical criterion such as ordinary least squares. The latter is often extended by regularisation methods to mitigate overfitting and bias, as in ridge regression. When dealing with non-linear problems, go-to models include polynomial regression (for example, used for trendline fitting in Microsoft Excel[90]), logistic regression (often used in statistical classification) or even kernel regression, which introduces non-linearity by taking advantage of the kernel trick to implicitly map input variables to higher-dimensional space.

Multivariate linear regression extends the concept of linear regression to handle multiple dependent variables simultaneously. This approach estimates the relationships between a set of input variables and several output variables by fitting a multidimensional linear model. It is particularly useful in scenarios where outputs are interdependent or share underlying patterns, such as predicting multiple economic indicators or reconstructing images,[91] which are inherently multi-dimensional.

Bayesian networks
Main article: Bayesian network

A simple Bayesian network. Rain influences whether the sprinkler is activated, and both rain and the sprinkler influence whether the grass is wet.
A Bayesian network, belief network, or directed acyclic graphical model is a probabilistic graphical model that represents a set of random variables and their conditional independence with a directed acyclic graph (DAG). For example, a Bayesian network could represent the probabilistic relationships between diseases and symptoms. Given symptoms, the network can be used to compute the probabilities of the presence of various diseases. Efficient algorithms exist that perform inference and learning. Bayesian networks that model sequences of variables, like speech signals or protein sequences, are called dynamic Bayesian networks. Generalisations of Bayesian networks that can represent and solve decision problems under uncertainty are called influence diagrams.

Gaussian processes
Main article: Gaussian processes

An example of Gaussian Process Regression (prediction) compared with other regression models[92]
A Gaussian process is a stochastic process in which every finite collection of the random variables in the process has a multivariate normal distribution, and it relies on a pre-defined covariance function, or kernel, that models how pairs of points relate to each other depending on their locations.

Given a set of observed points, or input–output examples, the distribution of the (unobserved) output of a new point as a function of its input data can be directly computed by looking at the observed points and the covariances between those points and the new, unobserved point.

Gaussian processes are popular surrogate models in Bayesian optimisation used to do hyperparameter optimisation.

Genetic algorithms
Main article: Genetic algorithm
A genetic algorithm (GA) is a search algorithm and heuristic technique that mimics the process of natural selection, using methods such as mutation and crossover to generate new genotypes in the hope of finding good solutions to a given problem. In machine learning, genetic algorithms were used in the 1980s and 1990s.[93][94] Conversely, machine learning techniques have been used to improve the performance of genetic and evolutionary algorithms.[95]

Belief functions
Main article: Dempster–Shafer theory
The theory of belief functions, also referred to as evidence theory or Dempster–Shafer theory, is a general framework for reasoning with uncertainty, with understood connections to other frameworks such as probability, possibility and imprecise probability theories. These theoretical frameworks can be thought of as a kind of learner and have some analogous properties of how evidence is combined (e.g., Dempster's rule of combination), just like how in a pmf-based Bayesian approach would combine probabilities.[96] However, there are many caveats to these beliefs functions when compared to Bayesian approaches to incorporate ignorance and uncertainty quantification. These belief function approaches that are implemented within the machine learning domain typically leverage a fusion approach of various ensemble methods to better handle the learner's decision boundary, low samples, and ambiguous class issues that standard machine learning approach tend to have difficulty resolving.[97][6] However, the computational complexity of these algorithms is dependent on the number of propositions (classes), and can lead to a much higher computation time when compared to other machine learning approaches.

Rule-based models
Main article: Rule-based machine learning
Rule-based machine learning (RBML) is a branch of machine learning that automatically discovers and learns 'rules' from data. It provides interpretable models, making it useful for decision-making in fields like healthcare, fraud detection, and cybersecurity. Key RBML techniques includes learning classifier systems,[98] association rule learning,[99] artificial immune systems,[100] and other similar models. These methods extract patterns from data and evolve rules over time.

Training models
Typically, machine learning models require a high quantity of reliable data to perform accurate predictions. When training a machine learning model, machine learning engineers need to target and collect a large and representative sample of data. Data from the training set can be as varied as a corpus of text, a collection of images, sensor data, and data collected from individual users of a service. Overfitting is something to watch out for when training a machine learning model. Trained models derived from biased or non-evaluated data can result in skewed or undesired predictions. Biased models may result in detrimental outcomes, thereby furthering the negative impacts on society or objectives. Algorithmic bias is a potential result of data not being fully prepared for training. Machine learning ethics is becoming a field of study and, notably, becoming integrated within machine learning engineering teams.

Federated learning
Main article: Federated learning
Federated learning is an adapted form of distributed artificial intelligence to train machine learning models that decentralises the training process, allowing for users' privacy to be maintained by not needing to send their data to a centralised server. This also increases efficiency by decentralising the training process to many devices. For example, Gboard uses federated machine learning to train search query prediction models on users' mobile phones without having to send individual searches back to Google.[101]

Applications
There are many applications for machine learning, including:

Agriculture
Anatomy
Adaptive website
Affective computing
Astronomy
Automated decision-making
Banking
Behaviorism
Bioinformatics
Brain–machine interfaces
Cheminformatics
Citizen Science
Climate Science
Computer networks
Computer vision
Credit-card fraud detection
Data quality
DNA sequence classification
Economics
Financial data analysis[102]
General game playing
Handwriting recognition
Healthcare
Information retrieval
Insurance
Internet fraud detection
Investment management[103]
Knowledge graph embedding
Linguistics
Machine learning control
Machine perception
Machine translation
Material Engineering
Marketing
Medical diagnosis
Natural language processing
Natural language understanding
Online advertising
Optimisation
Recommender systems
Robot locomotion
Search engines
Sentiment analysis
Sequence mining
Software engineering
Speech recognition
Structural health monitoring
Syntactic pattern recognition
Telecommunications
Theorem proving
Time-series forecasting
Tomographic reconstruction[104]
User behaviour analytics
In 2006, the media-services provider Netflix held the first "Netflix Prize" competition to find a program to better predict user preferences and improve the accuracy of its existing Cinematch movie recommendation algorithm by at least 10%. A joint team made up of researchers from AT&T Labs-Research in collaboration with the teams Big Chaos and Pragmatic Theory built an ensemble model to win the Grand Prize in 2009 for $1 million.[105] Shortly after the prize was awarded, Netflix realised that viewers' ratings were not the best indicators of their viewing patterns ("everything is a recommendation") and they changed their recommendation engine accordingly.[106] In 2010, an article in The Wall Street Journal noted the use of machine learning by Rebellion Research to predict the 2008 financial crisis.[107] In 2012, co-founder of Sun Microsystems, Vinod Khosla, predicted that 80% of medical doctors jobs would be lost in the next two decades to automated machine learning medical diagnostic software.[108] In 2014, it was reported that a machine learning algorithm had been applied in the field of art history to study fine art paintings and that it may have revealed previously unrecognised influences among artists.[109] In 2019 Springer Nature published the first research book created using machine learning.[110] In 2020, machine learning technology was used to help make diagnoses and aid researchers in developing a cure for COVID-19.[111] Machine learning was recently applied to predict the pro-environmental behaviour of travellers.[112] Recently, machine learning technology was also applied to optimise smartphone's performance and thermal behaviour based on the user's interaction with the phone.[113][114][115] When applied correctly, machine learning algorithms (MLAs) can utilise a wide range of company characteristics to predict stock returns without overfitting. By employing effective feature engineering and combining forecasts, MLAs can generate results that far surpass those obtained from basic linear techniques like OLS.[116]

Recent advancements in machine learning have extended into the field of quantum chemistry, where novel algorithms now enable the prediction of solvent effects on chemical reactions, thereby offering new tools for chemists to tailor experimental conditions for optimal outcomes.[117]

Machine Learning is becoming a useful tool to investigate and predict evacuation decision-making in large-scale and small-scale disasters. Different solutions have been tested to predict if and when householders decide to evacuate during wildfires and hurricanes.[118][119][120] Other applications have been focusing on pre evacuation decisions in building fires.[121][122]

Limitations
Although machine learning has been transformative in some fields, machine-learning programs often fail to deliver expected results.[123][124][125] Reasons for this are numerous: lack of (suitable) data, lack of access to the data, data bias, privacy problems, badly chosen tasks and algorithms, wrong tools and people, lack of resources, and evaluation problems.[126]

The "black box theory" poses another yet significant challenge. Black box refers to a situation where the algorithm or the process of producing an output is entirely opaque, meaning that even the coders of the algorithm cannot audit the pattern that the machine extracted from the data.[127] The House of Lords Select Committee, which claimed that such an "intelligence system" that could have a "substantial impact on an individual's life" would not be considered acceptable unless it provided "a full and satisfactory explanation for the decisions" it makes.[127]

In 2018, a self-driving car from Uber failed to detect a pedestrian, who was killed after a collision.[128] Attempts to use machine learning in healthcare with the IBM Watson system failed to deliver even after years of time and billions of dollars invested.[129][130] Microsoft's Bing Chat chatbot has been reported to produce hostile and offensive response against its users.[131]

Machine learning has been used as a strategy to update the evidence related to a systematic review and increased reviewer burden related to the growth of biomedical literature. While it has improved with training sets, it has not yet developed sufficiently to reduce the workload burden without limiting the necessary sensitivity for the findings research itself.[132]

Explainability
Main article: Explainable artificial intelligence
Explainable AI (XAI), or Interpretable AI, or Explainable Machine Learning (XML), is artificial intelligence (AI) in which humans can understand the decisions or predictions made by the AI.[133] It contrasts with the "black box" concept in machine learning where even its designers cannot explain why an AI arrived at a specific decision.[134] By refining the mental models of users of AI-powered systems and dismantling their misconceptions, XAI promises to help users perform more effectively. XAI may be an implementation of the social right to explanation.

Overfitting
Main article: Overfitting

The blue line could be an example of overfitting a linear function due to random noise.
Settling on a bad, overly complex theory gerrymandered to fit all the past training data is known as overfitting. Many systems attempt to reduce overfitting by rewarding a theory in accordance with how well it fits the data but penalising the theory in accordance with how complex the theory is.[135]

Other limitations and vulnerabilities
Learners can also be disappointed by "learning the wrong lesson". A toy example is that an image classifier trained only on pictures of brown horses and black cats might conclude that all brown patches are likely to be horses.[136] A real-world example is that, unlike humans, current image classifiers often do not primarily make judgments from the spatial relationship between components of the picture, and they learn relationships between pixels that humans are oblivious to, but that still correlate with images of certain types of real objects. Modifying these patterns on a legitimate image can result in "adversarial" images that the system misclassifies.[137][138]

Adversarial vulnerabilities can also result in nonlinear systems or from non-pattern perturbations. For some systems, it is possible to change the output by only changing a single adversarially chosen pixel.[139] Machine learning models are often vulnerable to manipulation or evasion via adversarial machine learning.[140]

Researchers have demonstrated how backdoors can be placed undetectably into classifying (e.g., for categories "spam" and "not spam" of posts) machine learning models that are often developed or trained by third parties. Parties can change the classification of any input, including in cases for which a type of data/software transparency is provided, possibly including white-box access.[141][142][143]

Model assessments
Classification of machine learning models can be validated by accuracy estimation techniques like the holdout method, which splits the data into a training and test set (conventionally 2/3 training set and 1/3 test set designation) and evaluates the performance of the training model on the test set. In comparison, the K-fold-cross-validation method randomly partitions the data into K subsets and then K experiments are performed each considering 1 subset for evaluation and the remaining K-1 subsets for training the model. In addition to the holdout and cross-validation methods, bootstrap, which samples n instances with replacement from the dataset, can be used to assess model accuracy.[144]

In addition to overall accuracy, investigators frequently report sensitivity and specificity, meaning true positive rate (TPR) and true negative rate (TNR), respectively. Similarly, investigators sometimes report the false positive rate (FPR) as well as the false negative rate (FNR). However, these rates are ratios that fail to reveal their numerators and denominators. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC), along with the accompanying Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC), offer additional tools for classification model assessment. Higher AUC is associated with a better performing model.[145]

Ethics
This section is an excerpt from Ethics of artificial intelligence.[edit]
The ethics of artificial intelligence covers a broad range of topics within AI that are considered to have particular ethical stakes.[146] This includes algorithmic biases, fairness, accountability, transparency, privacy, and regulation, particularly where systems influence or automate human decision-making. It also covers various emerging or potential future challenges such as machine ethics (how to make machines that behave ethically), lethal autonomous weapon systems, arms race dynamics, AI safety and alignment, technological unemployment, AI-enabled misinformation,[147] how to treat certain AI systems if they have a moral status (AI welfare and rights), artificial superintelligence and existential risks.[146]

Some application areas may also have particularly important ethical implications, like healthcare, education, criminal justice, or the military.

Bias
Main article: Algorithmic bias
Different machine learning approaches can suffer from different data biases. A machine learning system trained specifically on current customers may not be able to predict the needs of new customer groups that are not represented in the training data. When trained on human-made data, machine learning is likely to pick up the constitutional and unconscious biases already present in society.[148]

Systems that are trained on datasets collected with biases may exhibit these biases upon use (algorithmic bias), thus digitising cultural prejudices.[149] For example, in 1988, the UK's Commission for Racial Equality found that St. George's Medical School had been using a computer program trained from data of previous admissions staff and this program had denied nearly 60 candidates who were found to either be women or have non-European-sounding names.[148] Using job hiring data from a firm with racist hiring policies may lead to a machine learning system duplicating the bias by scoring job applicants by similarity to previous successful applicants.[150][151] Another example includes predictive policing company Geolitica's predictive algorithm that resulted in "disproportionately high levels of over-policing in low-income and minority communities" after being trained with historical crime data.[152]

While responsible collection of data and documentation of algorithmic rules used by a system is considered a critical part of machine learning, some researchers blame the lack of participation and representation of minority populations in the field of AI for machine learning's vulnerability to biases.[153] In fact, according to research carried out by the Computing Research Association in 2021, "female faculty make up just 16.1%" of all faculty members who focus on AI among several universities around the world.[154] Furthermore, among the group of "new U.S. resident AI PhD graduates," 45% identified as white, 22.4% as Asian, 3.2% as Hispanic, and 2.4% as African American, which further demonstrates a lack of diversity in the field of AI.[154]

Language models learned from data have been shown to contain human-like biases.[155][156] Because human languages contain biases, machines trained on language corpora will necessarily also learn these biases.[157][158] In 2016, Microsoft tested Tay, a chatbot that learned from Twitter, and it quickly picked up racist and sexist language.[159]

In an experiment carried out by ProPublica, an investigative journalism organisation, a machine learning algorithm's insight into the recidivism rates among prisoners falsely flagged "black defendants high risk twice as often as white defendants".[152] In 2015, Google Photos once tagged a couple of black people as gorillas, which caused controversy. The gorilla label was subsequently removed, and in 2023, it still cannot recognise gorillas.[160] Similar issues with recognising non-white people have been found in many other systems.[161]

Because of such challenges, the effective use of machine learning may take longer to be adopted in other domains.[162] Concern for fairness in machine learning, that is, reducing bias in machine learning and propelling its use for human good, is increasingly expressed by artificial intelligence scientists, including Fei-Fei Li, who said that "[t]here's nothing artificial about AI. It's inspired by people, it's created by people, and—most importantly—it impacts people. It is a powerful tool we are only just beginning to understand, and that is a profound responsibility."[163]

Financial incentives
There are concerns among health care professionals that these systems might not be designed in the public's interest but as income-generating machines. This is especially true in the United States, where there is a long-standing ethical dilemma of improving health care, but also increasing profits. For example, the algorithms could be designed to provide patients with unnecessary tests or medication in which the algorithm's proprietary owners hold stakes. There is potential for machine learning in health care to provide professionals with an additional tool to diagnose, medicate, and plan recovery paths for patients, but this requires these biases to be mitigated.[164]

Hardware
Since the 2010s, advances in both machine learning algorithms and computer hardware have led to more efficient methods for training deep neural networks (a particular narrow subdomain of machine learning) that contain many layers of nonlinear hidden units.[165] By 2019, graphics processing units (GPUs), often with AI-specific enhancements, had displaced CPUs as the dominant method of training large-scale commercial cloud AI.[166] OpenAI estimated the hardware compute used in the largest deep learning projects from AlexNet (2012) to AlphaZero (2017), and found a 300,000-fold increase in the amount of compute required, with a doubling-time trendline of 3.4 months.[167][168]

Tensor Processing Units (TPUs)
Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) are specialised hardware accelerators developed by Google specifically for machine learning workloads. Unlike general-purpose GPUs and FPGAs, TPUs are optimised for tensor computations, making them particularly efficient for deep learning tasks such as training and inference. They are widely used in Google Cloud AI services and large-scale machine learning models like Google's DeepMind AlphaFold and large language models. TPUs leverage matrix multiplication units and high-bandwidth memory to accelerate computations while maintaining energy efficiency.[169] Since their introduction in 2016, TPUs have become a key component of AI infrastructure, especially in cloud-based environments.

Neuromorphic computing
Neuromorphic computing refers to a class of computing systems designed to emulate the structure and functionality of biological neural networks. These systems may be implemented through software-based simulations on conventional hardware or through specialised hardware architectures.[170]

Physical neural networks
A physical neural network is a specific type of neuromorphic hardware that relies on electrically adjustable materials, such as memristors, to emulate the function of neural synapses. The term "physical neural network" highlights the use of physical hardware for computation, as opposed to software-based implementations. It broadly refers to artificial neural networks that use materials with adjustable resistance to replicate neural synapses.[171][172]

Embedded machine learning
Embedded machine learning is a sub-field of machine learning where models are deployed on embedded systems with limited computing resources, such as wearable computers, edge devices and microcontrollers.[173][174][175][176] Running models directly on these devices eliminates the need to transfer and store data on cloud servers for further processing, thereby reducing the risk of data breaches, privacy leaks and theft of intellectual property, personal data and business secrets. Embedded machine learning can be achieved through various techniques, such as hardware acceleration,[177][178] approximate computing,[179] and model optimisation.[180][181] Common optimisation techniques include pruning, quantisation, knowledge distillation, low-rank factorisation, network architecture search, and parameter sharing.

Software
Software suites containing a variety of machine learning algorithms include the following:

Free and open-source software
See also: Lists of open-source artificial intelligence software
Caffe
Deeplearning4j
DeepSpeed
ELKI
Google JAX
Infer.NET
JASP
Jubatus
Keras
Kubeflow
LightGBM
Mahout
Mallet
Microsoft Cognitive Toolkit
ML.NET
mlpack
MXNet
OpenNN
Orange
pandas (software)
ROOT (TMVA with ROOT)
scikit-learn
Shogun
Spark MLlib
SystemML
Theano
TensorFlow
Torch / PyTorch
Weka / MOA
XGBoost
Yooreeka
Proprietary software with free and open-source editions
KNIME
RapidMiner
Proprietary software
Amazon Machine Learning
Angoss KnowledgeSTUDIO
Azure Machine Learning
IBM Watson Studio
Google Cloud Vertex AI
Google Prediction API
IBM SPSS Modeller
KXEN Modeller
LIONsolver
Mathematica
MATLAB
Neural Designer
NeuroSolutions
Oracle Data Mining
Oracle AI Platform Cloud Service
PolyAnalyst
RCASE
SAS Enterprise Miner
SequenceL
Splunk
STATISTICA Data Miner
Journals
Journal of Machine Learning Research
Machine Learning
Nature Machine Intelligence
Neural Computation
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
Conferences
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL)
European Conference on Machine Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML PKDD)
International Conference on Computational Intelligence Methods for Bioinformatics and Biostatistics (CIBB)
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML)
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD)
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
See also
Automated machine learning – Process of automating the application of machine learning
Big data – Extremely large or complex datasets
Deep learning — branch of ML concerned with artificial neural networks
Differentiable programming – Programming paradigm
List of datasets for machine-learning research
List of machine learning algorithms and List of algorithms for machine learning and statistical classification
M-theory (learning framework) – Framework in machine learning
Machine unlearning – Field of study in artificial intelligence
Outline of machine learning
Solomonoff's theory of inductive inference – Mathematical theory